---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechatronics"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "mrt423"
course_title: "micro-electro-mechanical-systems"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# MRT423: Micro Electro Mechanical Systems  

## Course Objectives  

- Explain MEMS and Microsystems.  
- Apply MEMS in the field of automotive industries.  
- Summarize different methods of packaging.  
- Explain the application of scaling laws in the design of micro systems.  
- Use MEMS processes for micromachining.  

## Course Content  

### Module - 1 (Introduction to MEMS and Materials)  

- MEMS and Microsystems – Micromachining.  
- Materials for MEMS: Silicon-Compatible Material System, Other Materials and Substrates.  
- Important Material Properties and Physical Effects.  

### Module - 2 (MEM Structures and Systems in Applications)  

- General Design Methodology.  
- Techniques for Sensing and Actuation.  
- Common Sensing and Actuation Methods.  
- Passive Micromachined Mechanical Structures: Fluid Nozzles, Hinge Mechanisms.  
- Sensors and Analysis Systems: Pressure Sensors, High-Temperature Pressure Sensors, Mass Flow Sensors, Acceleration Sensors, Angular Rate Sensors, Gyroscopes, CO Gas Sensor.  
- Actuators and Actuated Microsystems: Thermal Inkjet Heads, Micromachined Valves, Micropumps.  

### Module - 3 (Packaging and Reliability Considerations)  

- Key Design and Packaging Considerations: Wafer/Stack Thickness, Wafer Dicing, Thermal Management, Stress Isolation, Protective Coatings, Hermetic Packaging, Calibration and Compensation.  
- Die-Attach Processes.  
- Wiring and Interconnects: Electrical, Microfluidic, Optical.  
- Packaging Solutions: Ceramic, Metal, Moulded Plastic.  
- Quality Control and Reliability Standards.  
- Statistical Methods in Reliability, Accelerated Life Modelling, Major Failure Modes.  

### Module - 4 (Scaling Laws in Miniaturization)  

- Scaling in Geometry.  
- Scaling in Rigid Body Dynamics.  
- Trimmer Force Scaling Vector.  
- Scaling in Electrostatic and Electromagnetic Forces.  
- Scaling in Electricity and Fluidic Dynamics.  
- Scaling in Heat Conducting and Heat Convection.  

### Module - 5 (Processes for Micromachining)  

- Basic Process Tools.  
- Advanced Process Tools.  
- Non-lithographic Microfabrication Technologies.  
- Combining the Tools – Examples of Commercial Processes.  
- Poly-silicon Surface Micromachining.  
- DRIE of SOI Wafers.  

## References  

- N. Maluf, *An Introduction to Microelectro Mechanical Systems Engineering*, Artech House, 2000.  
- Tai-Ran Hsu, *MEMS and Microsystems Design and Manufacture*, TMH, 2002.  
- Chang Liu, *Foundations of MEMS*, Pearson, 2012.  
- Julian W Gardner, *Microsensors: Principles and Applications*, John Wiley & Sons, 1994.  
- Mark Madou, *Fundamentals of Microfabrication*, CRC Press, 1997.  
- Stephen D. Senturia, *Microsystem Design*, Springer (India), 2006.  
- Thomas B. Jones, *Electromechanics and MEMS*, Cambridge University Press, 2001.  
