---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "electronics-and-communication-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "ect463"
course_title: "machine-learning"
language: "english"
contributor: "@alwynrejicser"
---

# ECT463: Machine Learning

## Course Objectives

- Understand the basics of machine learning and different types.
- Differentiate regression and classification, apply Bayes’ decision theory in classification.
- Apply linear algebra and statistical methods in discriminant-based algorithms.
- Understand the basics of unsupervised learning and non-metric methods.
- Understand ensemble methods, dimensionality reduction, evaluation, and model selection.

## Course Outcomes

- Explain the foundations and various types of machine learning paradigms.
- Perform regression and classification using suitable algorithms.
- Apply discriminant-based algorithms like perceptron and SVM for pattern classification.
- Analyze and implement unsupervised learning techniques and ensemble methods.
- Utilize dimensionality reduction techniques and evaluate machine learning models.

## Course Content

### Module 1

- Basics of machine learning: supervised and unsupervised learning, examples.
- Features, feature vector, training set, target vector, test set, feature extraction.
- Over-fitting and the curse of dimensionality.
- Review of probability theory, Gaussian distribution, and decision theory.

### Module 2

- **Regression**: linear regression, error functions in regression, multivariate regression, regression applications, bias and variance.
- **Classification**: Bayes’ decision theory, discriminant functions and decision surfaces, Bayesian classification for normal distributions, classification applications.

### Module 3

- Linear discriminant-based algorithms: perceptron, gradient descent method, perceptron algorithm.
- Support vector machines: separable classes, non-separable classes, multiclass case.

### Module 4

- **Unsupervised learning**: Clustering, examples, criterion functions, proximity measures, clustering algorithms.
- **Ensemble methods**: boosting, bagging.
- Basics of decision trees, random forest, examples.

### Module 5

- **Dimensionality reduction**: principal component analysis, Fisher's discriminant analysis.
- **Evaluation and model selection**: ROC curves, evaluation measures, validation set, bias-variance trade-off, confusion matrix, recall, precision, accuracy.

## References

1. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J., *The Elements of Statistical Learning*, Springer, 2001.
2. Duda, R.O., Hart, P.E., and Stork, D.G., *Pattern Classification*, Wiley, New York, 2001.
3. Bishop, C.M., *Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning*, Springer, New York, 2006.
4. Theodoridis, S. and Koutroumbas, K., *Pattern Recognition*, Academic Press, San Diego, 2003.

