---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "24-360-0201"
course_title: "environmental-pollution"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0201: ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION

## Course Objectives
* To give exposure to the students to the pollution problems, science of interaction of chemical ingredients and molecules in the natural and industrial (man-made) environment, the need of regulation, directive approaches and statutory guidelines for prevention and control for abatement. Methodology to be followed for monitoring and reporting to decision making authorities in the capacity of Environmental Experts for organizations, departments and judiciary. Students will get an overall basis for originating innovative thoughts to link environmental analytics with legal jurisprudence to support industry, pollution control boards, courts and tribunals.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Sources, nature and magnitude of air pollution as per the statutory regulation and standards, method of analysis and evolution of the extent of pollution.
* **CO 2:** Expertise achieved to realize sources, nature and magnitude of Noise pollution as per the statutory regulation and standards, method of analysis and evaluation of the extent of pollution.
* **CO 3:** Expertise achieved to decide sources, nature and magnitude of water pollution as per the statutory regulation and standards, method of analysis and evaluation of the extent of pollution.
* **CO 4:** Expertise achieved to realize the sources of air pollution as per the statutory regulation and standards, method of analysis and evaluation of the extent of pollution.
* **CO 5:** Expertise attained to study the pollution problems assigned, capable enough to prepare documents and reports to the authorities.


## Course Content

### Module - I Air Pollution
* Air pollution control acts, rules and notifications issued thereunder by Government of India. Sources and types of Pollutants – Natural and anthropogenic sources, primary and secondary pollutants. Criteria air pollutants. Sampling and monitoring of air pollutants (gaseous and particulates); period, frequency and duration of sampling. Principles and instruments for measurements of (i) ambient air pollutants concentration and (ii) stack emissions. Indian National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Impact of air pollutants on human health, plants and materials. Acid rain & Dispersion of air pollutants. Mixing height/depth, lapse rates, Gaussian plume model, line source model and area source model. Control devices for particulate matter: Principle and working of: settling chamber, centrifugal collectors, wet collectors, fabric filters and electrostatic precipitator. Control of gaseous pollutants through adsorption, absorption, condensation and combustion including catalytic combustion. Indoor air pollution, Vehicular emissions and Urban air quality


### Module - II Noise Pollution
* Noise pollution control acts, rules and notifications issued thereunder by Government of India. Sources, weighting networks, measurement of noise indices (Leq, L10, L90, L50, LDN, TNI). Noise dose and Noise Pollution standards. Noise control and abatement measures: Active and Passive methods. Vibrations and their measurements. Impact of noise and vibrations on human health

### Module - III Water Pollution
* Water pollution control acts, rules and notifications issued thereunder by Government of India. Types and sources of water pollution. Impact on humans, plants and animals. Measurement of water quality parameters: sampling and analysis for pH, EC, turbidity, TDS, hardness, chlorides, salinity, DO, BOD, COD, nitrates, phosphates, sulphates, heavy metals and organic contaminants. Microbiological analysis – MPN. Indian standards for drinking water (IS:10500, 2012). Drinking water treatment: Coagulation and flocculation, Sedimentation and Filtration, Disinfection and Softening. Wastewater Treatment: Primary, Secondary and Advanced treatment methods. Common effluent treatment plant. Designated Best Use of Water Sources as per CPCB

### Module - IV Soil Pollution
* Standards for Emission or Discharge of Environmental Pollutants from selected industries of locality and relevant to Kerala (chemical, petrochemical, rubber, pulp and paper, thermal, pesticide manufacturing, black carbon and sulphuric acid). Physico-chemical and biological properties of soil (texture, structure, inorganic and organic components). Analysis of soil quality. Soil Pollution control. Industrial effluents and their interactions with soil components. Soil micro-organisms and their functions – degradation of pesticides and synthetic fertilizers

### Module - V 
* Costal Regulation Zone 9 (CRZ), Environmental Impact Assessment Notification, The Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008. Thermal Pollution, Marine Pollution and Radioactive Materials: Sources of Thermal Pollution, Heat Islands, causes and consequences. Sources and impact of Marine Pollution. Methods of Abatement of Marine Pollution. Coastal management. Radioactive pollution – sources, biological effects of ionizing radiations, radiation exposure and radiation standards, radiation protection. Monitoring, sampling, analysis, interpretation and report writing taking up case studies


## References
1. Stanley, E. M.; (2017). -Environmental Chemistry , CRC Press.
2. Colin, B.; Michael, C.; Freeman, W.H.; (2008). Environmental Chemistry.
3. Nyle, C. B.; (2019). -The nature and properties of soil. Pearson education.
4. Rao, M N.; Rao, H. V. N.; (2017). -Air Pollution. Tata McGraw-Hill.
5. Metcalf.; Eddy.; (2017). Waste Water Engineering: Treatment and reuses, McGraw- Hill.
6. CPCB, (2010). -Noise pollution control acts, rules and notifications issued thereunder by Government of India. Central Pollution Control Board, Pollution Control Law Series, PCLS/02/2010 (6th Edition).