---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "24-360-0204"
course_title: "environmental-toxicology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0204: ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY

## Course Objectives
* The course aims to provide information on the scope and application of toxicological principles, measures, and factors. It also covers various standards for toxicology testing to assess environmental pollution. Students will learn about contaminants, their fate, toxicity in the environment, toxicity testing principles and statistical concepts, along with the environmental fate of contaminants and emerging issues. The course will also focus on molecular biology applications in ecotoxicology, which is crucial for analyzing environmental pollution in the present scenario of toxic exposures.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Understand the fundamental principles and scope of Environmental Toxicology, including dose-response relationships and factors influencing toxicity.
* **CO 2:** Analyze toxicity testing methods, statistical tools, and bioassays to assess toxicity and interpret data effectively.
* **CO 3:** Apply knowledge of molecular biology techniques in ecotoxicology, including biomarker analysis and gene expression assays, to assess ecotoxicological impacts.
* **CO 4:** Evaluate the environmental fate of contaminants and emerging issues in environmental toxicology, such as microplastics and nanotoxicology.
* **CO 5:** Apply cell culture techniques and cytotoxicity assays to assess the effects of contaminants on cell viability and function in practical applications and case studies.

## Course Content

### Module - I Introduction to Environmental Toxicology
* Definition of Toxicology, History and Evolution of Environmental Toxicology, Scope of Modern Toxicology, Environmental toxicology and chemistry, Sub disciplines of Toxicology, Numbers in Toxicology- Dose - Response Relationships, Dose-Response graphs, Frequency Response curve, Cumulative Response curve, Potency versus Toxicity, Safety versus Toxicity, Hypersensitivity and Hyposensitivity, Response concepts, Reserve Functional capacity, LD 50, LC 50, EC 50 . Practical problems in toxicity assessment – Entry Routes and its influence in toxicity, Factors that influence toxicity- Chemical, biological, nutritional and physical factors

### Module - II Fundamental Concepts in Toxicology
* Introduction to toxicity testing, Principles of biological tests, Typical toxicological testing methods, Standard methods, Statistical concepts in toxicity testing, Acute, Chronic, Prolonged toxicity tests, Potentiation, Teratogenicity, Carcinogenicity, Mutagenicity tests, Immune, Skin, Eyes, Behavior, Reproduction tests, Species and Multispecies toxicity tests. Statistical tools Probit, TEST, ToxR, EPA ProUCL, R, SAS, SPSS. Translocation and Structure-activity factors, Concept of bioassay, Threshold limit value, Margin of safety, Therapeutic index

### Module - III Environmental Fate of Contaminants and emerging issues
* Types of toxicants. Chemical Speciation- Operationally and classically defined species. Abiotic transformation reactions- hydrolysis and Redox reactions. Chlorinated Xenobiotics TransformationBiological- non-biological degradation process, photochemical degradation- chemical degradation. Long term effects of xenobiotics on aquatic organisms, Biotransformation and Absorption, distribution and excretion (ADME) of toxic agents. Case studies in Environmental toxicology historical cases of Environmental toxicity. Emerging environmental toxicology- Microplastics, Emerging contaminants, Climate change induced toxicity, pesticide residues, genetic toxicity, Nanotoxicology, Ecotoxicogenomics

### Module - IV Molecular Biology application in Ecotoxicology
* Introduction to Molecular Biology- Importance in ecotoxicology. Molecular biomarkers – DNA, protein biomarkers, genotoxicity assays to assess ecotoxicological impacts, significance. Genomics and Proteomics- Gene sequencing and analysis-Proteomics techniques- applications in ecotoxicology. Molecular Techniques-PCR and its variants-DNA sequencing methods, genetic mutations, Gene Expression Analysis-Real-time PCR (qPCR), Microarray technology in eco-toxicology, Gene editing techniques- CRISPR/Cas9, gene knockout. Case Studies and Applications- Real-world applications of molecular biology in eco-toxicology, Case studies highlighting the integration of molecular biology in eco- toxicology research

### Module - V Metabolism of Toxic Substances in cells and organisms
* Comparative Metabolism- Invertebrates and Vertebrates Variations- Uptake, Transport, Metabolism, Storage, and Excretion. Plant Metabolism of Toxic Substances- Uptake, Translocation, Excretion Plants as Pollution Indicators and Sources. Occupational Health and Hazards- Radiation, Emissions, Toxic Chemicals- Noise, Vibrations. Environmental Epidemiology- Ecological Studies, Case-Control, Cross-Sectional, Cohort Studies. QSAR and Toxicity. Computational Toxicology for Emergency Response Assessment. Cell culture- Importance, Types of cells used in Ecotoxicology, cell culture conditions, cytotoxicity assays- MTT, LDH release assay. Case studies and practical application


## References
1. Environmental toxicology; John H. Duffs, 1980, Edward Arnold Publishers, New Delhi.
2. Elements of toxicology; J. P Shukla and Pandey, Radha Publishers, New Delhi.
3. Fundamentals of Aquatic Toxicology; Rand, G.M . and Petrocelli, S.R.(Eds), (1985), Hemisphere Publishing Corporation, Washington.
4. Effects and Dose- response Relationships of Toxic metals- Nordberg.G, Elsevier Scientific Publishing Co., New York.
5. Modern Trends in Toxicology; Boy land E.and Goulding R, Butter worth's , London.
6. Essentials of Toxicology (IV); Loomis T. A. and A. Wallace, Hayes Academic Press, London.
7. Harper‘s Biochemistry; Murray et al., Apple ton and Lange, (1998), Prentice Hall, London.
8. Basic Environmental Toxicology; L.G. Cockerham and B.S. Shane, (1994), CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA.
9. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry; Donald G. Crosby, (1998), Oxford University Press, Boca Raton, USA.
10. Gerrit Schuurmann and Bernd Markert (1998). Ecotoxicology. Spektrum Akademischer Verlag Co publication Heidelberg. Berlin.
11. Walker C.H. Hopkin S.P. Sibly R.M and Peakall D.B (2001). Principles of Ecotoxicology. Second Edition, Taylor & Francis, London.
12. Clive Thompson K. Kirit Wadhia and Andreas P. Loibner (2005). Environmental Toxicity Testing . Blackwell Publishing Ltd. CRC Press.
13. Foekema E.M. Th. Scholten M.C. Van Dokkum H.P . Kaag N.H.B.M and Jak R.G (2005).
14. Laura Robinson. Ian Thorn (2005). Toxicology and Ecotoxicology in chemical safety Assessment. Black well Publishing Ltd. CRC Press.
15. Karen E Stine. Thomas M. Brown (2006). Principles of Toxicology, Second Edition, Taylor & Francis Group. CRC Press.
16. Nano toxicology; Yuliang Zhao and Harising Nalwa (2007). American Scientific Publishers.
17. Michael C Newman and William H Clements (2008). Ecotoxicology. Taylor & Francis Group. CRC Press.
18. Environmental Toxicology, an open online textbook (2023) By Sylvia Moes; Kees van Gestel; Gerco van Beek.
19. Cell and Molecullar Biology: Concepts and Experiments, Gerald Karp, Sixth Edition.
20. Freshney’s Culture of Animal Cells: A Manual of Basic Technique and Specialized Applications by R. Ian Freshney, Eighth Edition.
21. Molecular Cloning- A laboratory Manual, by Michael R Green and Joseph Sambrook, Fourth Edition.