---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "24-360-0206"
course_title: "fluid-mechanics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0206: FLUID MECHANICS
## Course Objectives
* To expose the students to acquire the theory and practices of Fluid Mechanics and Calculations for the study of fluid systems on a solid basis, for learning Environmental Science and Technology courses, conducting laboratory practicals, study models and simulations to equip them leadership for creative decision making as lead scientists and engineers.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Understand the importance of volume and mass flow, mass and energy balances, rate of accumulation, residence time, area-velocity calculations, force, pressure inter conversion of units and importance application of physical systems and parameters in environmental systems.
* **CO 2:** Basic aspects specific properties of fluid, their classification, Newtonian behavior, viscous and pressure forces in fluid dynamics are made strong to understand the situations where they are prominent.
* **CO 3:** Practical application of Fluid Mechanics in relation with environmental engineering systems is achieved, based on the prominent fundamental rules. Measurement of flow and use of flow devices are become thorough.
* **CO 4:** More practical applications of Fluid Mechanics are attained -for evaluating the flow characteristics, resistance due to roughness and uses of diagrams for decision making and reporting.
* **CO 5:** Evaluation of the extent of restrictions in pipe flow systems, calculation of head losses during distributions and settling velocity during sedimentation process in water, wastewater and natural flow systems.

## Course Content

### Module - I Basic Computations
* Volume and volume flow rate, mass and mass flow rate, velocity and area relations, rate of accumulation of mass, mass and energy balance concepts, calculation of area of cross section, surface area and volume of spheres, cylinders, pipes, channels, storage tanks and other bodies. Calculation of velocity, density, mass flow rate, volumetric flow rate, residence time in equipment and other parameters. Units of measurement and conversion factors. Properties of fluids. Temperature, pressure, specific gravity, density, specific volume, viscosity and other properties of fluids. Units of measurement and conversion factors

### Module - II Properties of Fluid
* Absolute and relative density, specific weight, shear stress and viscosity. Newton‘s law of viscosity, viscosity units and their conversion factors. Kinematic viscosity, surface tension, capillarity, compressibility, bulk modulus of elasticity, velocity of propagation of sound and sample calculations. Fluid statics: Pressure, pressure in compressible fluids, forces on plane surfaces, center of pressure, absolute pressure, static and dynamic system, force, concept of hydraulic jack, piezometric surface and hydraulic grade line. Head, pressure head, elevation head, velocity head and sample calculations

### Module - III Energy equation and its applications
* Bernoulli‘s equation and its practical applications, energy equation, energy line, kinetic energy, correction factor, power, liquid atomizer. Torricelli‘s law, measurement of flow rate: orifice meter, venturi meter, rotameter, pitot tube. Other devices like weirs and notches. Non-uniform flow: classification of flow, steady flow, uniform flow, and irrotational motion, Reynolds‘s number, Hagen- Poiseuille‘s law, friction head loss, minor head loss, and sample calculations

### Module - IV Turbulent flow
* Fanning equation, critical Reynolds‘s number, pipe flow, smooth and rough pipes, velocity distribution, friction factor, friction factor chart and commercial pipes. Moody diagram, Resistance at bends and other restrictions, equivalent length and k-values. Pipe flow systems: Friction head, Darcy- Weisbach equation. Competing forces, gravity and friction, Stoke‘s law. Drag coefficient, Sphere Reynolds‘s number, settling velocity and sample calculation

### Module - V Pipe Flow Systems
* Resistance at bends and other restrictions, equivalent length and k-values. Pipe flow systems: Friction head, Darcy-Weisbach equation. Competing forces, gravity and friction, Stoke’s law. Drag coefficient, Sphere Reynolds’s number, settling velocity and sample calculation

## References
1. Judd S and Stephenson T, Edr. (2005). Process Science and Engineering for Water and Wastewater Treatment, Vol. 4, IWA Publishing , 2005, ISBN electronic: 9781780402895, DOI: https://doi.org/10.2166/9781780402895.
2. V S Achari (2024) Fluid Mechanics For Environmental Systems, Teaching Materials, School of Environmental Studies, Cochin University of Science & Technology, Kochi- 682 022.
3. Boon R. C and V. S. Achari (2001). Flow Mechanics and Sedimentation, Bridging Course 0.2 Study Material, School of Environmental Studies, Cochin University of Science and Technology, Cochin.
4. Kundu P. K. and Ira M. Cohen (2010). Fluid Mechanics, Fourth Edition, ,ISBN: 0123814006, 9780123814005, Academic Press, New Delhi.
5. Modi P. N and S. M. Seth (2019). Hydraulics and Fluid Mechanics including Hydraulic Mechanics (in SI Units), 22nd Edition, ISBN, 13: 9788189401269 , Standard Book House, New Delhi.
6. Chin D. A. (2020). Water Resources Engineering, e- Text Book, 4 th Edition, ISBN -13-9780135357750, Pearson.
7. Subrahmanya K. (2002). Theory and Applications of Fluid mechanics: Including Hydraulic Mechanics, ISBN: 9780074603697, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, New Delhi.
8. Harry Von Huben (1995). Basic science concepts and applications(Principles and practices of water supply operations), second edition,ISBN 10: 0898677963 ISBN 13: 9780898677966 American Water
Works Association.
9. Price J.K (1998). Applied Math for Wastewater Plant Operators, ISBN: 0877628092, 9780877628095, CRC Press.