---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht402"
course_title: "chemical-process-equipment-design-ii"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT402: Chemical Process Equipment Design II

## Course Objectives

- Design binary tray distillation column
- Design packed bed absorption column
- Design sieve tray extraction column
- Design direct heat rotary dryer
- Design thin-walled unfired pressure vessels using Indian Standard codes

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Process Design of Separation Equipment

- **Process design of steady state isothermal binary component tray distillation columns (Sieve and valve tray):** Estimation of theoretical number of stages using McCabe Thiele method –Tray design tray efficiency - pressure drop, entrainment, downflow flooding and weeping.
- **Process design of steady state isothermal packed bed absorption and stripping column for dilute systems without chemical reaction:** Number of transfer units- height of transfer units – column diameter – packing height-liquid distribution-pressure drop
- **Process design of single solvent sieve tray extraction columns for immiscible system:** Number of trays, sieve tray design, height of coalesced layer, Murphree efficiency

### Module - 2: Dryer Design and Mechanical Design of Pressure Vessels

- **Design of Direct heat Rotary Dryers:** Estimation of air quantity, drying temperature, Number of Transfer Units, Diameter of dryer, Length, speed, slope, flight, hold up time
- **Mechanical design of process equipment:** Design of thin-walled pressure vessels as per IS 2825 – Shells subject to internal and external pressure- estimation of minimum thickness- corrosion allowance - standard plate thickness – flat ends, ends concave to pressure and convex to pressure: dished and flanged ends, conical ends
- **Mechanical design of tall pressure vessels:** Design of thin walled multi-course pressure vessels as per IS 2825 – Estimation of thickness of shells subject to external loads (wind and seismic)

## References

- Perry. R.H & Green.D.W., _Chemical Engineers Handbook_, Mc- Graw Hill.
- Robert E. Treybal, _Mass Transfer Operations_
- Kern D.Q., _Process Heat Transfer_, Tata McGraw Hill.
- Badger & Bancharo, _Introduction to Chemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill
- Coulson J.M.& Richardson J.F., _Chemical Engineering_, Vol.6, 3rd Edn, Butterworth- Heinemann, (Indian print)
- M.V Joshi & Mahajan V.V., _Process Equipment Design_, 3rd Edn, Mac-Milan & Co. India.
- McCabe W.L., Smith J.C. & Harriott P., _Unit Operations in Chemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill.
- B.C Bhattacharya, _Introduction to Chemical Equipment Design_, CBS Publishers & Distributors, New Delhi.
- E. Ludwig, _Applied Process Design for Chemical & Petrochemical Plants_, Vol I, II, III, Gulf Publication, London.
- IS Codes: Bureau of Indian Standards
