---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht414"
course_title: "air-pollution-monitoring-and-control"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT414: Air Pollution Monitoring and Control

## Course Objectives

- Define the sources, classifications, effects of air pollutants.
- Describe the ambient air quality standards as well as sampling and analysis of air pollutants from emission sources.
- Understand the concepts of atmospheric dispersion characteristics and nature based on lapse rate and inversion.
- Explain the selection strategies and types of equipment and its design to control particulates and gaseous pollutants.
- Explain the indoor air pollution sources, measurements, standards and control methods.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Air Quality (7 Hrs.)

- Structure and composition of Atmosphere – Definition, Scope and Scales of Air Pollution- Sources and classification of air pollutants-Effect on human health, vegetation, animals, property, aesthetic value and visibility- Ambient Air Quality and Emission standards–Ambient and stack sampling and Analysis of Particulate and Gaseous Pollutants.

### Module - 2: Atmospheric Dispersion of Air Pollutant (7 Hrs.)

- Effects of meteorology on Air Pollution - Fundamentals, Atmospheric stability- Dry adiabatic lapse rate derivation, Inversion, Wind profiles and stack plume patterns- Atmospheric Diffusion Theories – Dispersion models, Plume Rise-Numerical Problems.

### Module - 3: Control of Particulate Contaminants (7 Hrs.)

- Gas Particle Interaction – Working principle, Design and performance equations of Gravity Separators, Centrifugal separators, Fabric filters, Particulate Scrubbers, Electrostatic Precipitators – Operational Considerations- Factors affecting Selection of Control Equipment.

### Module - 4: Control of Gaseous Contaminants (7 Hrs.)

- Working principle, Design and performance equations of absorption, Adsorption, condensation, Incineration, Bio scrubbers, Venturi scrubber- Bio filters – Process control and Monitoring – Operational Considerations- Factors affecting Selection of Control Equipment–CO2 capturing, Hydrocarbon removal.

### Module - 5: Indoor Air Quality Management (7 Hrs.)

- Sources types and control of indoor air pollutants, sick building syndrome types – HVAC system IAQ issues and impacts on occupants—Developing an IAQ profile-Diagnose IAQ problem Control-Quantification and Measurement.

## References

- Lawrence K. Wang, Norman C. Pareira, Yung Tse Hung, _Air Pollution Control Engineering_, Tokyo, 2004.
- Noel de Nevers, _Air Pollution Control Engineering_, Mc Graw Hill, New York, 1995.
- Anjaneyulu. Y, _Air Pollution and Control Technologies_, Allied Publishers (P) Ltd., India 2002.
- C.S.Rao, _Environmental Pollution Control Engineering_, Wiley Eastern Ltd, Delhi.
- Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff, _Handbook of Air Pollution Prevention and Control_, Butterworth and Heinemann, Elsevier Science (USA), 2002.
- David H.F. Liu, Bela G. Liptak, _Air Pollution_, Lweis Publishers, 2000.
- Arthur C.Stern, _Air Pollution (Vol.I – Vol.VIII)_, Academic Press, 2006.
- Wayne T.Davis, _Air Pollution Engineering Manual_, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,2000
