---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht468"
course_title: "novel-separation-techniques"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT468: Novel Separation Techniques

## Course Objectives

- Summarize the factors influencing the choice of separation techniques.
- Develop models and solutions for membrane separation processes.
- Solve problems involving surfactant and adsorption based separation.
- Describe the treatment of process liquids by ion exchange process and it's applications.
- Explain the treatment of process liquids by Chromatographic Separations and it's applications.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Overview of Separation Processes and their Selection (8 Hrs.)

Characteristics and selection of separation process: Importance and variety of separation, economic significance, inherent separation factor, selection, factors influencing the choice of separation process, solvent selection, selection of equipment. Recent advances in separation techniques based on size, surface properties, ionic properties and other special characteristics of substances, Rate based versus equilibrium separation processes, Selection of separation process, Energy requirements of separation processes.

### Module - 2: Membrane processes (6 Hrs.)

Membrane processes: Introduction, Type and choice of membranes, Plate and frame, tubular, spiral wound and hollow fibre membrane reactors and their relative merits, Membrane filtration, Microfiltration, Nanofiltration, Ultrafiltration, Reverse Osmosis, Dialysis, Models for membrane separations.

### Module - 3: Surfactant Based Separation Techniques (6 Hrs.)

Surfactant Based Separation Techniques: Basic principles, classifications, Surfactants at Inter phases and in bulk, Foam fractionation, Foam flotation, Adsorptive bubble separations, Ion flotation, Micro emulsion /Macro emulsions, Hydrotopes, Solvent ablation.

### Module - 4: Adsorption systems (8 Hrs.)

Adsorption systems: Interacting solutes, Adiabatic adsorbers, velocity effects. Adsorption-Desorption operations: Thermal desorption of gases, Activated carbon solute recovery, Processing liquid using thermal regeneration, Pressure swing and vacuum swing adsorption, Regeneration with purge and desorbent. Ion exchange: Basics of Ion exchange, Ion exchange resins, Binary ion exchange equilibrium, Ion movement theory, Applications, Applications without exchange: Ion exclusion, Mass transfer in ion exchange systems.

### Module - 5: Chromatographic Separations (7 Hrs.)

Chromatographic Separations: Introduction, types of chromatography, Elution chromatography: Principles and Retention theory, Band broadening and separation efficiency, Types of chromatography, Large scale elution (cyclic/batch) chromatography, Selective adsorption of biological macromolecules, Simulated countercurrent techniques, Comparison with other separation methods.

## References

- Seader, J D, and Ernest J Henley. _Separation Process Principles_. New York, Wiley, 1998.
- Marcel Mulder, _"Basic Principles of Membrane Technology"_, 2 Ed., Springer Publications, 2007
- King C. J.; _"Separation Processes"_; Tata McGraw–Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., 1982.
- Wankat, P. C. _"Rate- Controlled Separations"_, Springer, 1994.
- R W Rousseau, _Handbook of Separation Process Technology_, John Wiley & Sons (2009)
- Nunes S P, Peinemann K V, _"Membrane Technology in the chemical industry"_, 2nd Edition, Wiley-VCH, 2006.
- Rautanbach and Albrecht R., _"Membrane Process"_, John Wiley and Sons.1989.
- Crespo. J G, Bodekes K W, _"Membrane Processes in separation and Purification"_, Kluwer Academic Publications, Netherland, 1994.
- Geankoplis C J _"Transport processes and Unit Operations"_, 4th Edition, PHI, New Delhi, 2006.
- Philip Schweitzer; _"Handbook of Separation Techniques for Chemical Engineers"_, Third Edition, Tata McGraw Hill New York, 1997.
