---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht423"
course_title: "oil-and-natural-gas-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT423: Oil and Natural Gas Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Identify different source rocks from which hydrocarbons are generated.
- Gain knowledge of how and why fluid hydrocarbons migrate from a source rock to reservoir rock, entrapment and accumulation of hydrocarbons.
- Identify sources of natural gas and its applications in variety of fields.
- Explain various methods of natural gas processing for dehydration and sweetening.
- Describe gas compression, gas gathering and transport installation.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Fundamentals of petroleum geology and exploration (8 Hrs.)

- Introduction, origin, formation, geological occurrence and characteristics of oil and natural gas. Source Rocks, Reservoir Rocks, and Cap rocks: Definition, Characteristics, Classification and nomenclature, Concept of Shale oil, Reservoir Properties, Hydrocarbon migration, Petroleum Exploration.

### Module - 2: Conventional and Unconventional Natural Gas (7 Hrs.)

- **Conventional natural gas:** Associated gas, non-associated gas, Gas condensate.
- **Unconventional production of natural gas:** Coal bed methane, Natural gas hydrate, shale gas and tight gas sands.
- **Coal bed methane:** Introduction, present status, formation and properties of coal bed methane.
- **Natural Gas Hydrate:** Concepts and Structures, Evaluation and Prediction, Production Techniques.
- **Shale Gas:** Exploration, Production - Drilling and completion.

### Module - 3: Estimation and Production of Natural Gas (6 Hrs.)

- **Estimation of gas reserves:** Volumetric method – Production of natural gas – Pressure decline method – Problems in the production of natural gas.
- **Separation and Processing:** Gas and liquid separation – internal construction of separators, types of separators, factors affecting separation, separator design, stage separation, low temperature separation.

### Module - 4: Gas Processing and Compression (7 Hrs.)

- **Dehydration of Natural gas:** Water content of natural gas streams, hydrate control in gas production, dehydration systems - Glycol dehydration and Solid desiccant dehydration.
- **Acid gas removal:** Metal oxide process, Slurry process, Amine process, Carbonate washing process, Methanol based process and Sulphur recovery process.
- **Compression of Natural Gas:** Types of Compressors, Selection of reciprocating and centrifugal compressors, Thermodynamics of Compressors, Compression calculations.

### Module - 5: Gas Transportation and LNG (7 Hrs.)

- **Gas flow measurement:** Fundamentals, Methods of measurements, Orifice meters equation, turbine meters, Selection, Recording charts, Uncertainties in flow.
- **Gas Gathering, Transportation and Storage:** Gas Gathering System, Steady State and Unsteady State Flow in Pipelines, Transmission of Natural Gas, Specifications. Underground Storage and Conservation of Natural Gas.
- **Liquefied Natural Gas:** Gas treating before liquefaction- Liquefaction cycles- Storage of LNG, Transportation- Regasification and cold utilization of LNG. Economics - Plant efficiency - Safety and environmental considerations.

## References

- Elements of Petroleum Geology, Richard, C. Selley, Elsevier, 1997.
- Fundamental of Natural Gas Processing, Arthur J. Kidnay, William R. Parrish, Taylor and Francis, 2006.
- Beggs D. H., _Gas Production Operations_, OGCI Publications, 1984.
- Natural Gas: A Basic Handbook, James G. Speight, Gulf Publishing Company, 2007.
- Gas Conditioning and Processing, John M. Campbell, Volume 2, 7th Edition, Campbell Petroleum Series, 1992.
- Ikoku, Chi, _Natural Gas Production Engineering_, John Wiley and Sons, 1984.
- Kumar Sanjay, _Gas Production Engineering_, Gulf Publishing Company, TX, USA, 1987.
