---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht453"
course_title: "project-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT453: Project Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Identify process equipment and P&ID symbols and read the process flow diagrams of a chemical plant.
- Describe the role of a project engineer in the design and erection of a process plant.
- Develop skills required for project planning & formulation and analyze processes for project execution & control.
- Describe the fundamental elements of a contract and choose the right contract type for a given situation.
- Differentiate the equipment and able to prepare a specification sheet.
- Estimate the capital investment required for an industrial process and determine the total product cost associated with an industrial process.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Project Development and Engineering (8 Hours)

- Classification of Projects, Scope of Project engineering - the role of project engineer.
- Development of project – R&D, TEFR, Importance of Laboratory development – Bench scale experiments – pilot plant studies – Semi-commercial plant.
- Plant location and site selection – preliminary data for construction projects - process engineering - flow diagrams – plot plans - engineering design and drafting.

### Module - 2: Project Planning and Construction

- Planning and scheduling of projects – use of bar chart, PERT/ CPM - Critical path calculations.
- Site development – foundation – Erection and site fabrication – Construction – Alignment and insulation – Start up and commissioning – Trial runs – Guarantees sums and hand over.

### Module - 3: Legal and Contractual Aspects

- Company formation process license – Technology Transfer – statutory sanctions.
- Contracts and Contractors – Introduction, detailing of scope of work, factors in selecting scope of work, detailing of contract types, Factors in selecting type of contract, contractor selection.

### Module - 4: Equipment Selection and Project Financing

- **Selection of process equipments:** Standard versus special equipment selection criteria, specification sheets.
- **Project financing:** Means of finance, financial institutions, special schemes, Financing with special reference to financial institutions in India, key financial indicators and ratios, personnel recruitment and training.

### Module - 5: Piping Engineering and Economic Evaluation

- **Piping Engineering:** Scope of piping engineering, pipe sizing technique, Codes and standards, Piping design, thermal insulation and buildings, safety in plant design.
- **Economic evaluation:** Economic evaluation of projects - Capital requirements and cost of production – profitability -Break even analysis and minimum cost analysis.

## References

- Rase & Barrow, _Project Engineering of Process Plants_, John Wiley
- Bhasin, S.D.: _Project Engineering of Process Plants_, Chemical Engineering Education Development Centre, I.I.T., Madras (1979).
- Peter S. Max & Timmer Haus, _Plant design and economics for chemical engineers_. Mc Graw Hill (2002).
- Srinath L. S., _PERT and CPM._ affiliated east press Pvt. Ltd., New York (1973)
- Perry J. H. _Chemical engineering handbook_ 7TH ed. Mc Graw Hill (1997).
- Jelen. F. C., _Cost and optimization in engineering_. Mc Graw Hill (1983).
- Frederick B. Plummer, _Project Engineering_, BH
- Ernest E. Ludwig, _Applied project engineering and Management_, Gulf Pub. Co., (1988)
