---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "group_d"
version: "2024"
semester: "1"
course_code: "gdeng101"
course_title: "engineering-graphics-and-computer-aided-drawing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@arya3077"
---

## SEMESTER S1
# ENGINEERING GRAPHICS AND COMPUTER AIDED DRAWING
**Course Code:** GDENG101  

## Course Objectives
1. To learn the principles and techniques of dimensioning and preparing engineering drawings.  
2. To develop the ability to accurately interpret and understand engineering drawings.  
3. To learn the features of CAD software.  

## SYLLABUS  

### Module 1 (Introduction & Projection of Points and Lines)  
* Relevance of technical drawing in engineering field.  
* Types of lines.  
* Dimensioning.  
* BIS code of practice for technical drawing. *(No questions for the end semester examination)*  
* Projection of points in different quadrants.  
* Projection of straight lines inclined to one plane and inclined to both planes.  
* Trace of a line.  
* Inclination of lines with reference planes.  
* True length and true inclinations of line inclined to both the reference planes.  

### Module 2 (Projection of Solids)  
* Projection of simple solids – Triangular, Rectangle, Square, Pentagonal and Hexagonal Prisms, Pyramids, Cone and Cylinder.  
* Projection of solids in simple position including profile view.  
* Projection of solids with axis inclined to one of the reference planes.  
* Projection of solids with axis inclined to both reference planes.  

### Module 3 (Sections of Solids & Development of Surfaces)  
* Sections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone and Cylinder with axis in vertical position and cut by different section planes.  
* True shape of the sections. *(Exclude true shape given problems)*  
* Development of surfaces of solids.  
* Development of solids cut by different section planes. *(Exclude problems with through holes)*  

### Module 4 (Isometric Projection & Computer Aided Drawing)  
* Isometric scale, Isometric view and projections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder, Sphere, Hemisphere and their combinations.  
* Computer Aided Drawing (CAD): Introduction and role of CAD in design and development of new products.  
* Advantages of CAD.  
* Creating two-dimensional drawings with dimensions using suitable software. *(CAD, only internal evaluation)*  

## Reference Books
1. Varghese, P. I., *Engineering Graphics*, V I P Publishers, 2018.  
2. Benjamin, J., *Engineering Graphics*, Pentex Publishers, 2016.  
3. John, K. C., *Engineering Graphics*, Prentice Hall India Publishers, 2017.  
4. Bhatt, N. D., *Engineering Drawing*, Charotar Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., 60th Edition, 2019.  
5. Anilkumar, K. N., *Engineering Graphics*, Adhyuth Narayan Publishers, 2022.  
6. Kulkarni, D. M., Rastogi, A. P., Sarkar, A. K., *Engineering Graphics with AutoCAD*, Prentice Hall India Publishers, 2020.  
7. Venugopal, K., *Engineering Drawing & Graphics*, New Age International Publishers, 5th Edition, 2011.  
8. Parthasarathy, N. S., Murali, V., *Engineering Drawing*, Oxford University Press, 2015.  
