---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht424"
course_title: "petroleum-refinery-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT424: Petroleum Refinery Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Apply the basic principles of chemical engineering in the storage, selection and evaluation of crude oil to optimize the refinery operation.
- Apply the basic principles of distillation in the atmospheric and vacuum distillation unit and analyze the preliminary refinery operation.
- Analyze thermal and catalytic conversion process as a part of the secondary conversion process.
- Select various techniques to improve the quality of gasoline to meet the Bharath stage norms and treatment techniques to other petroleum products.
- Identify various test methods to the petroleum products to meet the specification and understand the properties and uses of petroleum products.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction of Origin of Crude oil, Evaluation, Refining (8 Hrs.)

- Origin and formation of crude oil. Oil exploration and drilling. Storage and transportation of crude oil and products. Classification, Composition and Evaluation of oil stock. Status of Petroleum industry in India. Classification of petroleum refinery. Fundamentals of Refinery economics, Refinery complexity.

### Module - 2: Preliminary and Primary refinery operations (7 Hrs.)

- **Preliminary petroleum processing:** Impurities in crude oil, Dehydration and desalting of crude- Electric Desalter-, Process description, factors affecting the electric desalter. Pipe still furnaces and its operations.
- **Distillation of crude:** Prefractionator, Atmospheric topping unit, Vacuum distillation unit.

### Module - 3: Cracking and Coking Operations (7 Hrs.)

- **Thermal Conversion process:** Thermal cracking, Visbreaking, Coking. Types and uses of petroleum coke.
- **Catalytic conversion process:** Catalytic cracking-Types of Catalyst. Process description of Fluid Catalytic cracking unit. Process variables. Latest developments in the catalytic cracking process. Process description and applications of Hydro cracking.

### Module - 4: Reforming and Treatment of Light End products (7 Hrs.)

- **Quality up gradation of gasoline:** Catalytic reforming--Catalyst-Process description. Catalyst, Process description and application of Alkylation-Sulphuric acid alkylation, Isomerisation with Platinum catalyst. Hydrogen production in Refinery, Acid gas removal and Sulphur recovery process- Modified Claus process.
- **Treatment of gasoline:** Copper Chloride process and Merox sweetening. Production and treatment of L.P.G. Diesel Hydro desulphurisation (DHDS) and production of Ultra low sulphur Diesel (ULSD), Bharath stage norms of Diesel and Gasoline.

### Module - 5: Treatment and Test Methods of Petroleum Products (7 Hrs.)

- **Treatment:** Kerosene- Edeleanu process. Production and treatment of Lube- Phenol extraction. Dewaxing methods- Chilling and pressing and MEK dewaxing.
- **Properties, test methods and uses:** Refinery products such as L.P.G, Gasoline, Jet fuel, Kerosene, Diesel fuel, Lube oil and Bitumen.

## References

- Baskara Rao B.K, _Modern Petroleum Refinery Process_, Oxford& IBM
- Dr.Ram Prasad, _Petroleum Refining Technology_, Khanna Publishers
- Dr.Kochu Baby Manjooran S, _Modern Petroleum Chemistry_
- James H.Garry Glenn E. Handwerk Mark J.Kaiser, _Petroleum Refinery Technology and Economics_, CRC Press, Taylor and Francis group.
- I D Mall, _Petrochemical Process technology_, Macmillan
- Nelson W.L, _Petroleum Refinery Engineering_, McGraw Hill
- Gopala Rao M & Sitting M, _Drydens Outline of Chemical Technology_, Affiliated East West Press
