---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht444"
course_title: "polymer-technology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT444: Polymer Technology

## Course Objectives

- Understand the fundamentals and mechanisms of polymerisation, classification and methods of polymerisation.
- Describe methods to find out average molecular weight of polymers and understand the factors affecting polymer properties
- Summarize the manufacture, properties and engineering applications of different polymeric materials.
- Analyse the rheology and mechanical properties of polymers and to understand the functions of additives used in polymers.
- Explain the processing methods of plastics and elastomers.
- Describe the types, properties and applications of nanocomposites.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction to Polymers, Classification and kinetics (7 Hrs)

- Introduction to polymers-monomer, functionality, classification of polymer based on source, structure, application, thermal behaviour, mode of polymerization. Kinetics of step growth polymerisation, addition polymerization and Ionic polymerisations – anionic and cationic polymerization. Copolymerisation-Different types of copolymers – Characteristics. Methods of polymerization – bulk, solution, suspension and emulsion polymerization.

### Module - 2: Molecular weight of polymers (7 Hrs)

- Molecular weight of polymers – weight average and number average molecular weight – sedimentation and viscosity average molecular weights. Experimental methods for molecular weight determination – end group analysis, light scattering method – viscometry (Ostwald viscometer) intrinsic viscosity-sedimentation methods. Molecular weight distribution curve. Factors affecting polymer properties – crystallinity – orientation treatment – solubility of polymers – glass transition temperature – types of polymer degradation.

### Module - 3: Manufacture, properties and applications Bioplastics, Elastomers (7 Hrs)

- **Manufacture, properties and applications of polymers:** Thermoplastics – ABS – acrylics – cellulose acetate – fluoropolymers (PTFE) – nylons – polycarbonate – PVC – PE– PP – PS – polyurethanes. Thermosetting plastics – epoxy – phenol formaldehyde – urea formaldehyde –polyesters – silicones.
- **Bioplastics:** Poly lactic acid (PLA), Polyhydroxy Butyrate (PHB), Cellulose Acetate.
- **Elastomers:** Butyl rubber -Nitrile rubber.

### Module - 4: Rheology and Testing of polymers and additives used (7 Hrs)

- **Properties of polymers:** Rheology- viscous flow – apparent viscosity – rubber like elasticity – stress-strain behaviour of elastomers – viscoelasticity – stress relaxation and creep – measurement of rheological properties – melt flow index (MFI) – capillary rheometers. Estimation of mechanical properties like tensile strength, flexural strength, hardness and impact strength of polymers.
- **Additives for polymer processing:** Effect of additives used – plasticizers – colourants – heat stabilizers - antioxidants – ultraviolet absorbers – antistatic agents – flame retardants – blowing agents – lubricants and fillers.

### Module - 5: Processing of plastics and elastomers (7 Hrs)

- **Plastic processing technology:** Injection moulding – compression moulding – calendaring – blow moulding – extrusion – thermoforming – wet, dry and melt spinning methods for fibres – vulcanization of rubber –– general study of elastomer processing - brief description of compounding methods.
- **Introduction to polymer nano composites:** Types and properties of nanofillers applications.

## References

- Billmeyer F.W., _Text book of polymer science_, John Wiley.
- Gowariker V.R. _Polymer Science_, New Age.
- Premamoy Ghosh., _Polymer Science and Technology_, Tata Mc Graw Hill.
- Rodrigues F., _Principles of polymer systems_, Tata Mc Graw Hill
- Shah V.H., _Handbook of plastic testing technology_, Wiley, 1998
