---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht474"
course_title: "electrochemical-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT474: Electrochemical Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Understand the basics of electrochemistry and the laws associated with it.
- Describe the mass transfer phenomena in electrochemical systems.
- Understand the fundamentals of corrosion and study the theories of corrosion.
- Classify and understand the principles of electrochemical process.
- Understand the fundamentals of electrochemical reactors and its applications.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Review basics of electrochemistry (6 Hrs.)

- Review basics of electrochemistry: Faraday's law, Nernst potential galvanic cells, polarography. The electrical double layer, its role in electrochemical processes, electro capillary curve, Helmoltz layer, Guoy, Stern layer, fields at the interface.

### Module - 2: Mass transfer in electrochemical systems (7 Hrs.)

- Mass transfer in electrochemical systems: Diffusion controlled electrochemical reaction, importance of convention and the concept of limiting current, over potential, primary, secondary current distribution, rotating disc electrode.

### Module - 3: Introduction to corrosion (6 Hrs.)

- Introduction to corrosion: Electrochemical series, corrosion theories- derivation of potential, current relations of activities controlled and diffusion-controlled corrosion process. Potential, pH diagram, forms of corrosion, definition, factors and control methods of various forms of corrosion.

### Module - 4: Classification and understanding the principles of electrochemical process (8 Hrs.)

- Classification and understanding the principles of electrochemical process: Electro deposition, electro refining, electroforming, electro polishing, anodizing, selective solar coatings, primary and secondary batteries, types of batteries, fuel cells.

### Module - 5: Electrodes used in different electrochemical industries (8 Hrs.)

- **Electrodes used in different electrochemical industries:** Metals-Graphite – Lead dioxide – Titanium substrate insoluble electrodes – Iron oxide – semiconducting type etc. Metal finishing- cell design.
- **Types of electrochemical reactors:** Batch cell, fluidized bed electrochemical reactor, filter press cell, Swiss roll cell, plug flow cell, design equation, figures of merits of different types of electrochemical reactors.

## References

- Picket, _Electrochemical Engineering_, Prentice Hall, 1977.
- Newman, J.S., _Electrochemical systems_, Prentice Hall, 1973.
- Barak, M. and Stevenge, U.K., _Electrochemical Power Sources – Primary and Secondary Batteries_, 1980.
- Mantell, C., _Electrochemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill, 1972.
