---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht428"
course_title: "non-conventional-petroleum-resources"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT428: Non-Conventional Petroleum Resources

## Course Objectives

- Apply the concepts related to exploration, occurrence and origin of Shale Gas Reservoirs.
- Explain the concepts related to formation and properties of Coal Bed Methane.
- Summarize and apply the concepts related to formation and properties of gas hydrates.
- Analyse different processes for the conversion of coal and gas to oil.
- Demonstrate awareness related to economic and environmental considerations of non-conventional oil and gas.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Non-Conventional Oil

Non-Conventional Oil: Introduction, geology of heavy oil, extra heavy oil, tar, sand and bituminous oil shales, their origin and occurrence worldwide, resources, reservoir characteristics, new production technologies.

### Module - 2: Shale Gas (7 Hrs.)

Shale Gas: Introduction and present status of shale gas. Formation and properties of shale gas. Drilling and completion of shale gas. Uses and applications of shale gas. Environmental issues in shale gas exploration. Future prospects of shale gas.

### Module - 3: Coal Bed Methane (CBM)

Coal Bed Methane (CBM): Formation and properties of coal bed methane. Thermodynamics of coal bed methane. Exploration and evaluation of CBM. Hydro-fracturing of coal seam. Production installation and surface facilities. Well operations and production equipment.

### Module - 4: Gas Hydrates

Gas Hydrates: Introduction and present status of gas hydrates. Formation and properties of gas hydrates. Thermodynamics of gas hydrates. Drilling and completion of gas hydrates wells. Gas hydrates accumulation in porous media. Gas extraction from gas hydrates. Uses and applications of gas hydrates.

### Module - 5: Coal and Gas Conversion to Oil

Coal and Gas Conversion to Oil: Introduction, classification and principles, pyrolysis, theoretical aspect of processes involved in conversion, Environmental and Economic Considerations: Environmental considerations of non-conventional oil and gas. Treating and disposing produced water.

## References

- Carroll John, _Natural Gas Hydrates: A guide for engineers_, Gulf Professional Publications, 2014.
- Farouq Ali, S M, Jones J A and Meldau R F, _Practical Heavy Oil Recovery_, SPE, 1997.
- James T. Bartis, Frank Camm, David S. Ortiz, _Producing Liquid Fuels from Coal, Prospects and Policy Issues_. NETL, 2008.
- Pramod Thakur, Steve Schatzel and KashyAminian, _Coal BedMethane: From Prospects to Pipeline_, Elsevier, 2014.
- Rafiqul Islam, M, _Unconventional Gas Reservoirs: Evaluation, Appraisal and Development_, Gulf Professional Publishing, 2014.
- Warner, H.R., _Petroleum Engineering Handbook, Volume VI, Emerging and Peripheral Technologies_, 2007
