---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht448"
course_title: "nanomaterials-and-nanotechnology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT448: Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology

## Course Objectives

- Understand the concepts of nanotechnology and apply the basic principles of Physics and Chemistry in Nanotechnology.
- Explain synthesis, properties and applications of nanomaterials and nanocomposites.
- Apply nanotechnology in biological fields and acquire the knowledge about drug delivery, biosensors, nanomedicine and therapeutic applications.
- Understand the various characterisation techniques applied to nanomaterials.
- Understand the applications of nanotechnology in energy sector, catalysis and electronics.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction and general properties (7 Hrs.)

Introduction to Nanotechnology - History of nanotechnology, Pioneers in the field of nanotechnology. Classification of nano-materials: Zero, one, two and three dimensional nano-structured materials. Electromagnetic spectrum, particle size and its significance. Physics of nanomaterials - Size effect on thermal, electrical, electronic, mechanical, optical and magnetic properties of nanomaterials- surface area and aspect ratio- band gap energy- quantum confinement effect. Chemistry of nanomaterials - Ionic properties of nanomaterials, electronic phenomenon in nanostructures.

### Module - 2: Synthesis methods (7 Hrs.)

Synthesis methods - top down and bottom up approaches. Top down approach – size reduction techniques like milling and machining. Bottom up approach - Sol-gel methods, Chemical vapour deposition, Physical Vapour Deposition, Wet chemical synthesis, Laser ablation methods. Synthesis, properties and applications of nanomaterials like gold, silver and different types of nano-oxides like Al2O3, TiO2, ZnO and SiO2. Special nano-materials - synthesis, properties and applications – fullerenes, graphene, graphite, carbon nano-tubes, nano wires, nano rods, nanofluids, nanoclusters.

### Module - 3: Nanocomposites and Bionanotechnology (7 Hrs.)

Nanocomposites - Matrix materials- Basics of Metal matrix, Ceramic Matrix and Polymer Matrix nanocomposites - Nano-reinforcements, nanofillers-nanoclays. Introduction to bionanotechnology (fundamental concepts only) - Nanomedicine, Drug delivery, Therapeutic applications. Applications of biosensors, Future of Bionanotechnology.

### Module - 4: Characterisation techniques (7 Hrs.)

Characterisation techniques - Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) - Energy Dispersive X‐ray Spectroscopy (EDS) - Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) - Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) - Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM). UV-visible spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR), Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR). X-Ray Diffraction (XRD), Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS). Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA), Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC).

### Module - 5: Applications in energy, catalysis and electronics (7 Hrs.)

Applications (fundamental concepts only) -: Nanoscale advances in energy and catalysis - Nanotechnology for sustainable energy, nanotechnology enabled renewable energy technologies. Application of nanomaterials in catalysis. Nanoelectronics - Introduction to Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Nano Electro Mechanical Systems (NEMS). Nanomanipulation – STM based atomic manipulations, Nanolithography, softlithography, Scanning Probe Lithography, photolithography, E-beam Lithography, Focused ion beam lithography, Dip-pen Lithography.

## References

- Joel I. Gersten, _"The Physics and Chemistry of Materials"_, Wiley, 2001
- G. Cao, _Nanostructures & Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties & Applications_, Imperial College Press, 2004.
- S Zhang, L. Li and Ashok Kumar, _Materials Characterization Techniques_, CRC Press (2008).
- T. Pradeep, _Nano: The Essentials_, McGraw-Hill (India) Pvt Limited, 2008.
- Pulikel M. Ajayan, _Nanocomposite science and technology_, Wiley-VCH 2005
- C. M. Niemeyer, C. A. Mirkin, _"Nanobiotechnology: Concepts, Applications and Perspectives"_, Wiley – VCH, (2004)
- J. Twidell and T. Weir, _Renewable Energy Resources_, E & F N Spon Ltd, London, (1986)
- Bing Zhou, Sophie Hermans, Gabor A. Somorjai, _Nanotechnology in Catalysis Volumes 1 and 2_, Springer Science & Business Media, 05-Sep-2007
- W.R.Fahrner, _Nanotechnology and Nanoelectronics–Materials, Devices, Measurement Techniques_, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Germany (2006).
- K.W. Kolasinski, _"Surface Science: Foundations of Catalysis and Nanoscience"_, Wiley, 2002.
- S. Edelstein and R. C. Cammarata, _"Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications"_, Institute of Physics Pub., 1998.
- S.Yang and P.Shen: _"Physics and Chemistry of Nanostructured Materials"_, Taylor & Francis, 2000.
- Z L Wang (Ed.), _Characterization of Nanophase materials_, Willet-VCH (2000).
- Guo, Jinghua (Ed.), _X-rays in Nanoscience - Spectroscopy, Spectromicroscopy, and Scattering Techniques_, John Wiley &Sons (2010).
- _Handbook of Nanoscience, Engineering and Technology_, Kluwer publishers, 2002.
- David S Goodsell, _"Bionanotechnology"_, John Wiley & Sons, (2004).
- Zheng Cui, _Nanofabrication, Principles, Capabilities and Limits_, Springer Science + business media, New York (2008).
