---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "24-360-0105"
course_title: "environmental-microbiology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0105: ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY

## Course Objectives
* Course aims to introduce basic biology students to the world of microbes. Students will familiarize with different types of microbes present in the environment, to isolate those microbes, identify and characterize them. Course will cover the structure, reproduction, clinical manifestations, epidemiology and preventive measures of different pathogens present in the environment.


## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Explain the basics of microbiological techniques, isolation techniques and microscopy.
* **CO 2:** Discuss the concept and goal of molecular microbiology, gene structure and regulation in bacteria.
* **CO 3:** Describe the structure, function, nutrition and its uptake in bacteria, fungi, protozoa and algae.
* **CO 4:** Discuss the structure, properties and cultivation of pathogenic viruses.
* **CO 5:** Describe the microbial interactions, nutrient cycling, factors affecting their growth and microbial ecology.


## Course Content

### Module - I Introduction to Microbiology
* History and scope of microbiology; Different kinds of media for isolation and study of microorganisms; Microbiological water and sediment samplers; Microscope and microscopy; Concept of pure cultures and methods of obtaining pure cultures; Control of microorganisms by physical and chemical agents - definitions, the pattern of microbial death, conditions influencing the effectiveness of antimicrobial agents


### Module - II Fundamentals in Molecular Biology
* Concepts and criteria of molecular microbiology. Detection and isolation of mutants, Gene structure; Regulation of gene activity in prokaryotes: Transcription, Translation - polypeptide synthesis, Feed back inhibition -, E coli lactose system and operon model, Attenuation, Global regulatory systems - catabolic repression. PCR variations - Nested PCR, Inverse PCR, Reverse -transcriptase PCR, Real time PCR; DNA sequencing - Sanger‘s chain termination method, Automated DNA sequencer, BLAST search algorithm, Construction of phylogenetic tree and Next generation sequencers; Whole genome shot gun sequencing; Metagenomics

### Module - III Bacteria, Fungi, Protozoans and Microalgae
* Bacteria: Cell structure: size, shape and arrangements, cell organization - cell membranes, cytoplasmic matrix, nucleoid, cell wall, components external to the cell wall - capsule, slime layers and S - layers, pilli and fimbriae, flagella, motility and chemotaxix. Bacterial endospores Bacterial nutrition - Common nutrient requirements - requirement for carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorous and sulphur, nutritional types, requirements for growth factors; Nutrient up take- Passive diffusion and active transport, group translocation and ion uptake. Bacterial growth- Growth curve, mathematics of growth, measurement of microbial growth, continuous culture of microorganisms. Fungi: Basic concepts, distribution, importance, structure, nutrition and metabolism, reproduction, characteristics of fungal division and classification. Protozoans: Basic concepts, distribution, importance, morphology, nutrition, encystment and excystment, locomotor yorganells, reproduction and classification. Microalgae: Basic concepts, distribution, structure, algal nutrition, algal reproduction, characteristics, classification

### Module - IV Viruses
* Early development in virology; General properties of viruses; Cultivation of viruses; Virus preparation; purification and assays; Structure of viruses; Bacteriophages -classification and replication. Viroids and prions; Viruses of fungi, algae and protozoans; Virus vaccines and interferons


### Module - V Microorganisms Interaction and Microbial Ecology
* Foundations of microbial ecology and microbial interactions - mutualism, cooperation, commensalisms, predation, parasitism, amensalism, competition, symbiosis in complex systems; Influence of environmental factors on growth - solute and water activity, pH, temperature, oxygen concentration, pressure, radiation; Microbial growth in natural environment- growth limitation by environmental factors, counting viable but non -cultivable cells, quorum sensing, and microbial populations; Nutrient cycling interactions - carbon cycle, sulphur cycle, nitrogen cycle, manganese cycle, microorganisms and metal toxicity; The physical environment - Microenvironment and niche, biofilm and microbial mats, microorganisms and ecosystems, microorganism movement between ecosystems

## References
1. Clark, D.P.;(2010). Molecular Biology .Elsevier Inc. Amsterdam.
2. Daniel, D. C. ;(2012). Environmental Science. 9th Edition Jones & Bartlett Learning.
3. Flint, S.J.; Enquist,L.W.; Racaniello, V.R.; Skalka,A.M.;(2009). Principles of Virology. (3rd Edition) ASM Press, Washington , DC.
4. Fulekar, M.H.;(2010). Environmental Microbiology. Science Publishers CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group.
5. Gerald, K.;(2010). Cell Biology. 6th Edition International Student Version John Wiley & Sons, Limited, Willey-Blackwell, USA.
6. Jeffrey, C.; Pommerville.; (2004). Alcamos Fundamentals of Microbiology. 7th Edition Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
7. Prescott, L.M.; HareleyJ.P.;Klein,D.A.; (2005). Microbiology. (6thEdition). McGraw Hill Publishing Co.Ltd.
8. Raina M.M.; IanL.P.; Charles,P.G.; (2006). Environmental Microbiology Elsevier, Academic Press, San Diego, CA, USA.