---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "24-360-0301"
course_title: "environmental-impact-and-risk-assessment"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0301: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT AND RISK ASSESSMENT
## Course Objectives
* Understand the historical perspective, concepts, and theoretical foundations of environmental impact assessment globally and in India.
* Explore methodologies for quantifying and assessing risks to human health and the environment.
* Learn to identify, evaluate, and mitigate potential environmental impacts of various human activities using tools and techniques.
* To acquire knowledge of the socio-ecological and economic perspectives of any developmental project.
* Cultivate critical thinking skills to assess the effectiveness of proposed mitigation measures and risk management strategies.


## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Students will demonstrate knowledge of the legal and regulatory frameworks governing environmental impact and risk assessment processes at local, national, and international levels.
* **CO 2:** Students will be able to apply the principles and methodologies of environmental impact assessment to evaluate the potential environmental effects of proposed projects, policies, or activities.
* **CO 3:** Students will learn to identify, quantify, and assess risks to human health and the environment associated with various environmental stressors, contaminants, and activities.
* **CO 4:** Students will develop the ability to engage with diverse stakeholders, including communities, government agencies, industry representatives, and non-governmental organizations, to solicit input and address concerns throughout the environmental assessment process.
* **CO 5:** Students will be able to propose and evaluate mitigation measures and alternatives to minimize adverse environmental impacts and reduce risks to human health and ecosystems.

## Course Content

### Module - I Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
* Nature and purpose of environmental impact assessment (EIA).- Historical Development of EIA- Evolution and milestones in the development of EIA globally-Legal and Regulatory Frameworks in EIA- Overview of international conventions, laws, and regulatory frameworks influencing EIA-Types and Scope of EIA- Different types of EIA methodologies, their applications, and limitations- Cross-Sectoral Considerations in EIA-Interdisciplinary and crosssectoral aspects impacting EIA- Terms of References in EIA- Defining and establishing the terms of references for EIA studies- EIA in Project Cycle - Current issues in EIA-Legal and Regulatory Aspects in India

### Module - II EIA Process and Methodologies
* Principles of EIA- EIA in India - Overview and steps involved in the EIA process- Screening, Scoping, and Public Participation- Methods for screening projects, scoping studies, and involving the public in the EIA process, presentation and review- Establishing the Environmental baseline- Criteria and standards for assessing significant Impact. -Mitigation Strategies- Approaches and techniques for mitigating potential environmental impacts-Generic structure of EIA Document

### Module - III Tools and Techniques in EIA
* Impact Prediction and Assessment-Prediction tools and methodologies for assessing impacts on air, water, soil, noise, and biological communities-Cumulative Impact Assessment- Techniques for evaluating cumulative impacts of multiple projects or activities

### Module - IV Economic Impact Assessment
* Socio-economic Impact Assessment-Definition, models, and planning process for social impact assessment- Community Impacts- Impacts on individuals, families, communities, and institutions- Documentation of EIA Findings & Report Preparation

### Module - V Environmental Management and Risk Assessment
* Environmental Management Plans (EMP)- Preparation, implementation, and rehabilitation plans in EMPs. Monitoring and Auditing- Policies, guidelines, and post-project audit in environmental monitoring programs. Process of Environmental Risk Assessment- Risk Monitoring - Risk communication, emergency preparedness plans, and designing risk management programsRole of GIS in ERM - Tools for Environmental Risk Assessment-HAZOP and FEMA methods Event tree, fault tree and MCACA -Quality aspects of Environmental Impact Assessment-case studies

## References
1. Morris, P., & Therivel, R. (2021). Environmental Impact Assessment: Theory and Practice (4th ed.). Routledge.
2. Glasson. J.; (2019). “Introduction To Environmental Impact Assessment” 5th Edition, Taylor and Francis.
3. Salim M,; Zobaidul, K.; (2018). “Evaluating Environmental and Social Impact Assessment in Developing Countries”. Elsevier.
4. Dr. Y. R. M Rao.; Dr. N. S. Raman.; (2018). “Environmental Impact Assessment”. Laxmi Publications Pvt Ltd.
5. Marsden, S., & Cordonier Segger, M.-C. (2017). Strategic Environmental Assessment in International and European Law: A Practitioner’s Guide. Cambridge University Press.
6. Anji, R M.; (2017). “Environmental Impact Assessment”. Butterworth-Heinemann.
7. Abington: Routledge. Brown, K. 2015. Resilience, Development and Global Change. London.
8. Fischer, T., & Gagnon, A. (2017). The Practice of Strategic Environmental Assessment. Earthscan.
9. I.V. Murali Krishna and Valli Manickam (2016). Environment Management- a primer for industries. BS Publications.
10. Anjaneyulu, Y., & Singh, A. K. (2016). Environmental Impact Assessment: Practical Solutions to Recurrent Problems. Springer.
11. Eccleston, C. H. (2015). Environmental Impact Assessment: A Guide to Best Professional Practices. Wiley-Blackwell.
12. Routledge Glasson, J. and Therivel, R. 2013. Introduction To Environmental Impact Assessment.
13. Grumbine, R.E. and Pandit, M.K., 2013. Threats from India’s Himalaya dams. Science, 339:36-37.
14. Petts, J., & Ferrett, T. I. (Eds.). (2012). Handbook of Environmental Impact Assessment. Wiley Blackwell.
15. Pandit, M.K. and Grumbine, R.E., 2012. Potential effects of ongoing and proposed hydropower development on terrestrial biological diversity in the Indian Himalaya. Conservation Biology, 26: 1061-1071.
16. Glasson, J., Therivel, R., & Chadwick, A. (2012). Introduction to Environmental Impact Assessment. Routledge.
17. arthwal, R.R.;  (2012). “Environmental Impact Assessment”. New Age International Private Limited; 2nd Edition.
18. Blaikie, P., Cannon, T., Davis, I. and Wisner, B. 2003. At Risk: Natural Hazards, People’s Vulnerability and Disasters(2nd Ed.).
19. Lawrence, D.P.; (2003). “Environmental Impact Assessment - Practical Solutions to recurrent problems”, Wiley-Interscience, New Jersey.
20. Routledge. Morris. P. & Therivel. R., 2001,Methods of environmental impact assessment, 2nd Ed. Spon Press, New York, With a chapter on GIS and EIA by A.R. Bachiller & G. Wood, p. 381-401.
21. Morris, P., & Therivel, R. (2001). Methods in Environmental Impact Assessment. Routledge.
22. Petts, J. 1999. Handbook Of Environmental Impact Assessment. Vol. 1, Blackwell Science.
23. Petts, J.; (1999). “Handbook of Environmental Impact Assessment”, Vol., I and II, Blackwell Science, London.
24. Canter, L.W.; (1996). “Environmental Impact Assessment”. McGraw Hill, New York.