---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "phl120"
course_title: "engineering-physics-lab"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---

# PHL120 - Engineering Physics Lab

## Course Outcomes

- Develop analytical/experimental skills and impart prerequisite hands-on experience for engineering laboratories  
- Understand the need for precise measurement practices for data recording  
- Understand the principle, concept, working and applications of relevant technologies and comparison of results with theoretical calculations  
- Analyze the techniques and skills associated with modern scientific tools such as lasers and fiber optics  
- Develop basic communication skills through working in groups in performing the laboratory experiments and by interpreting the results  

---

## Syllabus

### List of Experiments  
(Minimum **8** experiments should be completed)

1. **CRO** – **Measurement of frequency and amplitude of waveforms**  
2. **Strain Gauge** – **Measurement of strain using Wheatstone bridge**  
3. **LCR Circuit** – **Forced and damped harmonic oscillations**  
4. **Melde’s String Apparatus** – **Measurement of frequency in the transverse and longitudinal modes**  
5. **Newton’s Rings** – **Wavelength measurement of a monochromatic source**  
6. **Air Wedge** – **Determination of diameter of thin wire or thickness of paper**  
7. **Millimeter Scale as Grating** – **Measurement of wavelength**  
8. **Diffraction Grating** – **Measurement of wavelength of a light source**  
9. **Transmission Grating** – **Determination of dispersive and resolving power**  
10. **Lycopodium Powder** – **Determination of particle size**  
11. **Laser Diffraction** – **Wavelength measurement using standard laser (He-Ne)**  
12. **Optical Fiber** – **Calculation of numerical aperture and study of signal loss**  
13. **Solar Cell** – **I-V characteristics**  
14. **LED** – **Characteristics study**  
15. **Ultrasonic Diffractometer** – **Measurement of wavelength and velocity of ultrasonic waves in liquids**  
16. **Deflection Magnetometer** – **Determination of magnetic moment using Tan A position**  

---

## References

1. S. L. Gupta and V. Kumar, *Practical Physics with Viva Voce*, Pragati Prakashan, Revised Edition, 2009  
2. M. N. Avadhanulu, A. A. Dani, P. M. Pokley, *Experiments in Engineering Physics*, S. Chand & Co., 2008  
3. S. K. Gupta, *Engineering Physics Practicals*, Krishna Prakashan Pvt. Ltd., 2014  
4. P. R. Sasikumar, *Practical Physics*, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2011  
