---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 7
course_code: "pecht745"
course_title: "process-integration"
language: "english"
contributor: "@arya3077"
---

# PECHT745: Process Integration

## Course Objectives
* Impart fundamental principles and concepts of process integration and its importance in enhancing efficiency and sustainability in industrial processes.  
* Apply energy targeting methods to determine the minimum energy requirements and design heat exchanger networks using pinch analysis.  
* Develop skills in the design of mass exchanger networks for efficient mass transfer and resource utilization.  
* Apply comprehensive process integration techniques to integrate reactor systems and distillation columns.  

---
## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction and Energy Targeting)
* Introduction to Process Integration:
  - Definition, areas of application, techniques.
  - Onion model of chemical process design.
  - Role of thermodynamic laws.
* Energy targeting methods of Heat Exchanger Networks:
  - Composite curve method.
  - Problem table algorithm.
  - Grand composite curve.
---
### Module - 2 (Heat Exchanger Network Design)
* Targeting of Heat Exchanger Network:
  - Number of units targeting.
  - Area targeting.
  - Cost targeting.
  - Number of shells targeting.
* Heat Exchanger Network Design:
  - Pinch design method.
  - Grid diagram.
  - Stream splitting design for single pinch networks.
---
### Module - 3 (Mass Exchanger Network Synthesis)
* Mass Exchanger Network synthesis:
  - Minimum Mass Separating Agents (MSA).
  - Mass exchange networks for minimum external MSA.
* Water system design:
  - Water use.
  - Targeting maximum water reuse for single contaminants.
---
### Module - 4 (Integration of Reactor and Distillation Systems)
* Integration of Reactor Systems:
  - Choice of idealized reactor model and reactor performance.
  - Reactor configurations and temperature control.
  - Heat integration characteristics of reactors.
  - Appropriate placement of reactors.
* Integration of Distillation Systems:
  - Distillation sequencing.
  - Heat integration characteristics of a distillation column.
  - Appropriate placement of distillation columns.
---

## References
1. Robin Smith, *Chemical Process Design and Integration*, John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., 2nd Edition, 2016.  
2. Uday V. Shenoy, *Heat Exchanger Network Synthesis*, Gulf Publishing Co., 1st Edition, 1995.  
3. Warren D. Seider, J. D. Seader, and Daniel R. Lewin, *Product & Process Design Principles*, Wiley Publication, 3rd Edition, 2015.  
4. I.C. Kemp, *Pinch Analysis and Process Integration: A User Guide on Process Integration for Efficient Use of Energy*, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2nd Edition, 2006.  
5. Jirí J. Klemeš, Petar S. Varbanov, Sharifah R. W. W. Alwi, and Zainuddin A. Manan, *Process Integration and Intensification: Saving Energy, Water and Resources*, De Gruyter, 1st Edition, 2014.  
6. Mahmoud M. El-Hawalgi, *Process Integration*, Academic Press, 1st Edition, 2006.  
