---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 7
course_code: "pecht744"
course_title: "process-automation"
language: "english"
contributor: "@arya3077"
---

# PECHT744: Process Automation

## Course Objectives
* Equip students with the skills to map and analyze process flows, define input and output parameters, and implement automation.
* Understand automatic control principles, enabling the design and optimization of control systems effectively.
* Apply advanced control strategies and integrate them into automated systems to enhance process reliability and performance in industrial applications.


---  

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to Automation)
* Introduction to automation.
* Architecture of industrial automation systems.
* Measurement systems characteristics.
* Levels of automation.
* Automated flow lines and transfer mechanisms.
* Data acquisition management.
* Introduction to PLC and PLC functions.
---

### Module - 2 (Process Flows and Control Principles)
* Process flows: process mapping, flows, input and output parameters.
* Automation steps in process industries.
* PDCA (Plan, Do, Check, Act) automation cycle.
* Introduction to automatic control:
  - P-I-D control
  - PID control tuning
  - Feed-forward ratio control
  - Sequence control
---

### Module - 3 (Control Systems and SCADA)
* Flow control valves.
* Hydraulic control systems.
* Pneumatic control systems.
* Higher-level automation systems.
* Introduction to computer-based industrial automation:
  - Direct Digital Control (DDC)
  - Distributed Control System (DCS)
  - Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) based architectures
* SCADA for process industries.
* Process safety automation: Levels of process safety and control.
---

### Module - 4 (Advanced Automation Technologies)
* Robotic Process Automation (RPA):
  - Definition, applications, tools, and platforms.
* Business Process Management (BPM):
  - Definition, tools, platforms, BPM vs RPA.
* Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML):
  - Definition, applications, tools, and platforms in process automation.
* Integration and data management:
  - Integration platforms
  - Data management tools
  - Data analysis and reporting tools
---

## References
1. S. Mukhopadhyay, S. Sen, and A. K. Deb, *Industrial Instrumentation, Control and Automation*, Jaico Publishing House, 2013.  
2. George Stephanopoulos, *Chemical Process Control: An Introduction to Theory and Practice*, Prentice Hall India, 2012.  
3. Curtis D. Johnson, *Process Control Instrumentation Technology*, Pearson New International, 8th Edition, 2013.  
4. Lukas M.P., *Distributed Control Systems*, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1986.  
5. *SMEC Industrial Automation Tools and Techniques*.  
6. Naqvi, J., and M. Munoz, *Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Robotic Process Automation Policy and Government Applications*, Anthem Press, 2020.  
