---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "ece"
version: "2024"
semester: 5
course_code: "pcect502"
course_title: "analog and digital communication"
language: "english"
contributor: "@arya3077"

---

# PCECT502 - Analog and Digital Communication

## Course Objectives

1. To analyse different analog and digital communication systems.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1
- Block diagram of a communication system, need for modulation.  
- Amplitude modulation: Equation and spectrum of AM signal, DSB-SC, SSB - pilot carrier and Vestigial Sideband systems.  
- Angle modulation: Narrow and wide band FM and their spectra, relationship between FM and PM, Carson’s rule, pre-emphasis and de-emphasis filtering.  
- Comparison of AM and FM.  
- Block diagram of FM receiver.  
- Superheterodyne receivers – characteristics of receivers, image frequency.  
- Noise: external, internal, white noise.  

---

### Module 2
- Sampling and quantization, SQNR for uniform quantization, companding.  
- Pulse code modulation: transmitter and receiver.  
- DPCM transmitter and receiver.  
- Delta modulation, slope overload.  
- Line codes.  

---

### Module 3
- Baseband data transmission of digital data through AWGN channel.  
- Mathematical model of ISI, Nyquist criterion for zero ISI, signal modelling for ISI, raised cosine spectrum.  
- Equalization, zero forcing equalizer.  
- Geometric representation of signals: Gram-Schmidt procedure, signal space.  
- Vector model of AWGN channel.  
- Matched filter and correlation receivers, MAP receiver, maximum likelihood receiver.  

---

### Module 4
- Digital band pass modulation schemes: BPSK system and signal constellation, BPSK transmitter and receiver.  
- QPSK system and signal constellations.  
- BER analysis of BPSK and QPSK in erfc, plots of BER vs SNR.  
- QPSK transmitter and receiver.  
- Quadrature amplitude modulation and signal constellation.  

---

## Reference Books

- *Principles of Communication Systems* – Herbert Taub, Donald L. Schilling, McGraw-Hill Education, 4/e, 2013.  
- *Digital Communications* – John G. Proakis, Masoud Salehi, McGraw-Hill Education, 6/e, 2020.  
- *Communication Systems Engineering* – John G. Proakis, Masoud Salehi, Pearson, 2/e, 2001.  
- *Digital Communication Systems, An Indian Adaptation* – Simon Haykin, John Wiley & Sons, 4/e, 2021.  
- *Electronic Communication Systems* – George Kennedy, McGraw-Hill, 6/e, 2017.  
- *Introduction to Digital Communications* – Wayne Stark, Cambridge University Press, 1/e, 2023.  
- *Communication Systems* – Simon Haykin, Michael Moher, Wiley, 5/e, 2020.  
- *Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems* – B. P. Lathi, Zhi Ding, Oxford University Press, 5/e, 2018.  
- *Introduction to Analog and Digital Communication, An Indian Adaptation* – Simon Haykin, Michael Moher, Wiley, 2/e, 2022.  

---
