---
country: "india"
university: "mahatma-gandhi-university"
branch: "computer-applications-honours"
version: "2024"
semester: "2"
course_code: "mg2ccrbca100"
course_title: "mathematics-foundations-to-computer-science"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Amendamaria"
---
# MG2CCRBCA100 - Mathematics Foundations to Computer Science

This course will introduce graph theory and mathematical techniques that form the foundation of advanced computational methods, focusing on numerical methods and optimization. It enables students to comprehend and apply various problem-solving strategies to address both theoretical and practical challenges in computer science.

---
## Course Objectives

* Apply Concepts of Graph Theory to solve real-life problems.
* Apply numerical methods to approximate solutions to mathematical problems.
* Understand the concepts of Linear Programming and Operations Research, and apply them using graphical and simplex methods.
* Formulate and solve transportation problems.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Elementary Graph Theory
* *Graph Basics:* Basic terminologies of graphs, connected and disconnected graphs, subgraphs, paths and cycles, complete graphs, digraphs, and weighted graphs.
* *Special Graphs:* Planar graphs, Euler graphs, and their characterization.
* *Trees:* Basic concepts of Trees and Spanning trees, and properties of trees.

### Module 2: Numerical Methods
* *Roots of Nonlinear equations:* Bisection method and Newton-Raphson methods.
* *Numerical Interpolation:* Newton's Forward and Backward Interpolation Formula.
* *Numerical Integration:* Trapezoidal rule and Simpson's 1/3 rule.

### Module 3: Linear Programming Problem
* *Introduction:* Formulation of a Linear Programming Problem (LPP).
* *Solution Methods:* Graphical method for solving LPP with two variables, and special cases in graphical methods.
* *Simplex Method:* The simplex method, artificial variable techniques, and the Big M method.

### Module 4: Transportation Problem
* *Fundamentals:* Definition and linear form of the transportation problem.
* *Feasible Solutions:* North-west corner method, Least cost method, and Vogel's approximation method.
* *Optimal Solutions:* The MODI method for finding the optimum solution, and handling degeneracy, unbalanced problems, and maximization.

---
## References
* **Core References:**
    * Robert J McEliece, Robert B Ash, Carol Ash - Introduction to Discrete Mathematics, McGraw Hill.
    * E Balagurusamy - Numerical Methods, Tata McGraw Hill.
    * V K Kapoor - Operations Research- Concepts, Problems & Solutions, Sultan Chand & Sons
* **Suggested Readings:**
    * Narsingh Deo - Graph Theory with applications to Engineering and Computer Science.
    * P Kandasamy, K Thilagavathy, K Gunavathi - Numerical Methods.
    * Belly E Gillet - Introduction to Operations Research (A Computer Oriented Arithmetic Approach), Tata Mc Graw Hill.