---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "sw1341"
course_title: "social-legislation"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1341: Social Legislation 

## Course Objectives
* To provide an overview of social legislation and familiarise students with pertinent legislations.
* To educate the students about the existing judicial system & functioning.
* To provide an insight into legal literacy.
* To create awareness about legal services authority and laws relating to women and children.

## Course Content
### Module I -  Social Legislation
* Social legislation: **meaning**, scope, definition,
* Related concepts: Social justice, Social protection, Social change, Social defence
* **Indian Constitution**: Salient features of Indian constitution – preamble, fundamental rights, Fundamental Duties, directive principles of state policy, right to constitutional remedies

### Module II - Types of Law
* Civil and criminal laws
* Personal laws: Special marriage act, Indian divorce act, Indian succession act, family court act 

### Module III - Legal Literacy
* Awareness about legal proceedings
* Arrest Warrant, FIR, Summons, bail, anticipatory bail ,charge sheet ,legal Rights of arrested persons, police custody, Judicial Custody, legal aid clinic
* PIL(public interest litigation)
* IPR(intellectual property right)
* RTI(Right to Information Act)
* Vigilance and anti corruption law-ombudsman and lokayuktha, lok adalath

### Module IV - Legal Services Authorities
* **Legal Services Authorities** NALSA, KELSA,DLSA –Structure and functions
* **Various commissions**: NHRC,NWC,NCPCR
* **Laws relating to women**: Protection of women from domestic violence act, 2005, The sexual harassment of women at work place 2013, dowry prohibition act 2005, Medical termination of pregnancy TP act
* **Laws relating to children**: POCSO Act, juvenile justice act 1986 child labour prohibition and regulation act 1986
* **Laws relating to environment**: Forest right act
* Consumer protection

### Module V - Judicial Systems
* ORGANS of administration: Legislative, executive Judiciary
* Process of framing legislation in legislative assemblies and parliaments 
* Types of Courts: **Civil courts** :Muncif court I, Sub-court, district court, High court and Supreme court
* **Criminal courts**: Magistrate court, Sub-court, Sessions court, High court and Supreme court

## References
1. Gangrade, K.D. Social Legislations in India. Delhi: Concept Publishing Company, 1978.
2. Baxi, U., The State and Human Rights Movements in India, Sage, New Delhi, 1998.
3. Manohar S, The Indian Judiciary and Human Rights, Butterworths, New Delhi, 2000.
4. Parasuraman S.K.R, G & Fernadez B, Institutional Context: Socio Cultural., Books for Change, Bangalore 2003.
5. Singh S. D, Socioeconomic disparities and violation of Human Rights in India: Problems and Perspectives, Deep and Deep, New Delhi, 2001.
6. Government of India: The Constitution of India.
7. Bare Acts.
8. Kulkarni P.D: Social Policy and Social Development in India, Association of School of Social Work in India, Madras, 1979.
9. Indian Government : The Constitution of India, Government of India Press, New Delhi, 1960.
