---
country: "india"
university: "national-institute-of-technology-calicut"
branch: "industrial-power-and-automation"
version: "2023"
semester: 2
course_code: "ee6411e"
course_title: "industrial-drives-and-control"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# EE6411E: Industrial Drives and Control

## Course Outcomes
* CO 1: Analyze the significance of industrial drives and their industrial applications.
* CO 2: Apply power electronic converters in industrial drives.
* CO 3: Analyze the performance of DC and AC Drives.
* CO 4: Design and development of control systems for industrial drives.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Introduction to Industrial Drive
* Basics of drive systems and their importance in industrial applications
  - Overview of industrial drive components: motors, drives, sensors, and actuators
  - Classification of drive systems
* Electric Motors in Industrial Drives
  - Types of electric motors (DC motors, AC motors, brushless DC motor, permanent magnet synchronous motor)
  - Motor characteristics and selection criteria
  - Motor control techniques
* Power Electronic Converters in Industrial Drives
  - Basics of power electronics in drive systems
  - Types of power converters

### Module 2: DC Motor Drives
* DC Drives
  - Working principles of DC drives
  - Control techniques for DC drives
  - Speed and torque control in DC drives
* DC Drive System Modeling and Simulation
  - Mathematical modeling of drive components
  - Dynamic analysis of drive systems 
  - Transient and steady-state analysis of drive systems
  - Transfer function and state-space representations
  - Simulation tools for drive systems

### Module 3: AC Motor Drives
* Principles and operation of AC drives
* Control strategies for AC drives
* Speed control techniques for AC drives
  - Variable Frequency Drives (VFDs)
  - Field Oriented Control (FOC)
* AC Drive System Modeling and Simulation
  - Dynamic analysis of AC Drive systems
  - Transient and steady-state analysis of drive systems 
  - State-space representations
* Simulation tools for drive systems

### Module 4: Control System Design and Implementation
* Control System Basics
  - Open-loop and closed-loop control concepts
* Control System Design
  - Controller selection and design criteria
  - PID controller design and tuning techniques
  - Advanced control strategies for industrial drives
* Safety Considerations and Fault Diagnosis
  - Safety practices and standards in industrial drive systems
  - Fault detection, diagnosis, and troubleshooting techniques
  - rotection mechanisms for drive systems

## References
1. Bose, B. K., "Modern Power Electronics and AC Drives," Pearson Education, 2002.
2. Dubey, G. K., "Fundamentals of Electrical Drives," CRC Press, 2018.
3. Pillai, P. C., "A First Course on Electrical Drives," Wiley, 2019.
4. Ramaiah, V., "Industrial Drives: Electrical Theory and Application," New Age International, 2015.
5. Veltman, A., "Industrial Control Electronics," Cengage Learning, 2018.
6. Austin Hughes and Bill Drury, "Electric Motors and Drives: Fundamentals, Types, and Applications", 4th ed., Newnes, 2020.
7. Seung-Ki Sul, "Control of Electric Machine Drive Systems", Wiley-IEEE Press, 2011.
8. Ned Mohan, "Advanced Electric Drives: Analysis, Control, and Modeling Using MATLAB/Simulink", Wiley, 2014.
9. James L. Kirtley Jr., "Electric Drive Systems and Operation: An Industrial Guide", Wiley-IEEE Press, 2012.