---
country: "india"
university: "national-institute-of-technology-calicut"
branch: "industrial-power-and-automation"
version: "2023"
semester: 2
course_code: "ee6413e"
course_title: "renewable-energy-integration-and-control"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# EE6413E: Renewable Energy Integration and Control

## Course Outcomes
* CO 1: Analyse of the operation and control of power systems with a specific emphasis on the challenges associated with integrating diverse renewable generation into the grid.
* CO 2: Design and analyze solar power generation systems utilizing photovoltaic (PV) panels, while also gaining exposure to various cell technologies.
* CO 3: Design a deep understanding of wind energy-based renewable energy sources, and establish a solid foundation in power electronics stages employed for their integration.
* CO 4: Analyse the integration and control of renewable energy systems, while effectively analyzing stability issues that may arise in the process.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Introduction to Renewable Energy System
* Various techniques of utilizing power from renewable energy sources
  - Concept of nano/micro/mini grid
* Need of integrating large renewable energy sources
* Issues related to integration of large renewable energy sources
* Ground mounted type, rooftop plants
* Concept of VPP
* Ancillary services in Indian Electricity Market (regulatory aspect)
* CERC and CEA orders (technical and safety standards)

### Module 2: Solar Photovoltaic System
* Solar PV Cell and modules
  - Cell structure
  - Front and back surface
  - I-V Characteristics
  - Efficiency & Quality of the Cell
  - Series and parallel connections
  - Maximum power point tracking
  - Applications
  - Different losses and mitigation
  - Anti-reflective coating
  - Properties and materials
  - The layers of PV modules
  - Module mismatching
  - Shading and hot-spot formation
  - Environmental effect on PV module performance
* Need of power electronic equipment’s in grid integration
* DC-DC converter
* Inverter
* Chopper

### Module 3: Wind Energy Conversion System
* Working principle
* Classification – horizontal and vertical
* Stability due to variable speed and counter measures
* Factors influencing wind
* Variation of wind speed with height and time
* Power speed characteristics
* Power estimation in wind
* MPPT operation
* Wind energy conversion principles
* Components of wind energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
* Classification of WECS - Stand Alone, Grid connected and hybrid WECS
* Variable speed generators
* Control systems
* Power collection system

### Module 4: Grid Integration and control
* Introduction
* Principles of power injection
* Converting technologies
* Power flow
* Instantaneous active and reactive power control approach
* Integrating multiple renewable energy sources
  - DC link integration
  - AC link integration
  - HFAC link integration
* Islanding and interconnection
* Based on synchronous/induction generator for peak demand reduction
* Grid connected PV system
* Stability due to variable speed and counter measures

## References
1. C. S. Solanki, “Solar Photovoltaics: Fundamentals, Technologies and Applications”, Prentice Hall of India, 2011.
2. S. P. Sukhatme "Solar Energy-Principles of Thermal Collection & Storage", TMH Publishing Co., New Delhi.
3. Majid Jamil, M. Rizwan, D.P.Kothari, “Grid integration of solar photovoltaic systems”, CRC Press (Taylor & Francis group), 2017
4. Allen J. Wood, Bruce F. Wollenberg, Gerald B. Sheblé, “Power Generation, Operation, and Control,” John Wiley & Sons, 3rd ed. New York, 2013.
5. M.H.Rashid, “Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices,” and Applications”. Pearson Education India, 2013.
6. L.P.Singh, “Advanced power system analysis and dynamics”, New age international publishers, 2017.