---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "gcmat401"
course_title: "mathematics-for-physical-science-4"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# GCMAT401 - Mathematics for Physical Science – 4

## Course Objectives

1.  To familiarize students with the foundations of **probabilistic and statistical analysis** used in various engineering applications.
2.  To provide students with the basics of various **numerical methods** to develop problem-solving skills.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Discrete Random Variables

-   Fundamentals of **discrete random variables**, their probability distributions, and cumulative distribution functions.
-   Analysis of **Binomial** and **Poisson distributions**, including expectation, mean, and variance.

### Module 2: Continuous Random Variables

-   Fundamentals of **continuous random variables**, their probability distributions, and cumulative distribution functions.
-   Study of **Uniform**, **Normal**, and **Exponential distributions**.

### Module 3: Statistical Inference

-   **Confidence Intervals** for a population mean for large and small samples.
-   **Hypothesis testing** using **z-tests** and **t-tests** for population means and proportions.

### Module 4: Numerical Methods

-   Solving equations and systems using **Newton-Raphson**, **Gauss Elimination**, and **Gauss-Jordan methods**.
-   Numerical solutions for ODEs using **Euler's** and **Runge-Kutta methods**.
-   **Curve fitting** using the Method of Least Squares.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences* – Devore J. L, Cengage Learning, 9th edition, 2016
-   *Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis* – S S Sastry, PHI Learning, 5th edition, 2012
-   *Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes* – Papoulis, A. & Pillai, S.U., McGraw Hill, 4th edition, 2002
-   *Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists* – Ross, S. M., Academic Press, 6th edition, 2020
-   *Numerical methods for Engineers* – Steven C. Chapra, Raymond P. Canale, McGraw Hill, 8th edition, 2021

---
