---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "pcaot402"
course_title: "flight-mechanics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PCAOT402 - Flight Mechanics

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the **performance of airplanes** under different operating conditions.
2.  To examine the aircraft’s **static and dynamic response** to changes in flying circumstances.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Steady Level Performance

-   Concepts of **airspeed** and **Mach number**. Analysis of the **Drag polar** equation.
-   **Thrust and power required vs. available** for straight and level flight, including the effects of altitude.

### Module 2: Accelerated Performance

-   Calculation of aircraft **range and endurance**.
-   Analysis of **gliding, climbing, take-off, and landing performance**.
-   Study of **turning performance** and the **V-n diagram**.

### Module 3: Static Stability

-   Introduction to **static and dynamic stability**.
-   **Static longitudinal stability** (stick fixed/free, neutral point, static margin).
-   **Directional stability** (weather cock) and **Lateral stability** (dihedral effect).

### Module 4: Aircraft Dynamics

-   Derivation of aircraft **equations of motion** and stability analysis using Routh’s criterion.
-   **Longitudinal dynamics**, including **Phugoid motion** (long and short period).
-   **Lateral dynamics**, including **Spiral divergence**, **Dutch roll**, and **spin**.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Aircraft Performance and design* – John D Anderson Jr., McGraw-Hill, 2017
-   *Airplane Performance Stability and Control* – Courtland D Perkins, Robert E Hage, John Wiley & Sons
-   *Flight stability and automatic control* – Nelson R C, McGraw-Hill, 2004
-   *Advanced Aircraft Flight performance* – Filippone, Antonio, Cambridge university, 2012
-   *Steady Aircraft flight and performance* – N.Harris, McClamroch, Princeton University, 2011
-   *Theory and Practice of aircraft performance* – Ajoy Kumar Kundu, et al., Wiley, 2016
-   *Dynamics of flight stability and control* – Bernard Etkin, Lloyd Duff Reid, Wiley, 3rd Edition, 1996
-   *Aircraft performance: An Engineering Approach* – Mohammed H Sadraey, CRC Press, 2023
-   *Introduction to Flight* – John D Anderson Jr, McGraw-Hill, 8th Edition, 2016

---
