---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "pbaot404"
course_title: "low-speed-aerodynamics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PBAOT404 - Low Speed Aerodynamics

## Course Objectives

1.  To explain and use **basic theorems in fluid mechanics** and sketch flow patterns.
2.  To apply complex variable transformations to **predict airfoil performance** characteristics.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Fundamental Concepts

-   **Reynold’s transportation theorem** and the governing equations of fluid flow (Continuity, energy, momentum).
-   Concepts of **Stream function**, **Potential function**, **Circulation**, and **Vorticity**.
-   Analysis of **elementary flows** and their combinations.

### Module 2: Ideal and Real Flow

-   Ideal flow over a circular cylinder, **D’Alembert’s paradox**, and the **Magnus effect**.
-   **Kutta-Joukowski theorem** and Kutta condition.
-   Application of **conformal transformation** and **Blasius theorem** to analyze flow.

### Module 3: Airfoil and Wing Theory

-   Application of **Thin Airfoil Theory** to predict airfoil characteristics.
-   Concepts of vortex filament, **Biot-Savart law**, bound vortex, trailing vortex, and horseshoe vortex.
-   Introduction to **Lifting Line Theory** and its limitations.

### Module 4: Panel Methods and Propeller Theory

-   Introduction to numerical methods in aerodynamics like **Source and Vortex Panel methods**.
-   Boundary layer growth over a flat plate.
-   Study of **Propeller Theories**, including Ideal Momentum and Blade Element theory.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Fundamentals of Aerodynamics* – John D Anderson, McGraw Hill, 5th Edition
-   *Aerodynamics for Engineering students* – E.L. Houghton, et al., McGraw Hill, 6th Edition, 2016
-   *Fluid Mechanics* – Frank M. White, McGraw Hill, 8th edition
-   *Mechanics of Flight* – A C Kermode, Pearson India, 11th edition, 2011
-   *Aerodynamics for Engineers* – J Bertin, Pearson Education, 7th edition

---
