---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "cst322"
course_title: "data-analytics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST322: Data Analytics

## Course Objectives
* Illustrate the mathematical concepts for data analytics.
* Explain the basic concepts of data analytics.
* Illustrate various predictive and descriptive analytics algorithms.
* Describe the key concepts and applications of big data analytics.
* Demonstrate the usage of MapReduce paradigm for big data analytics.
* Use R programming tool to perform data analysis and visualization.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Mathematics for Data Analytics)
* Descriptive statistics - Measures of central tendency and dispersion.
* Association of two variables - Discrete variables, Ordinal and Continuous variable.
* Probability calculus - Probability distributions.
* Inductive statistics - Point estimation, Interval estimation.
* Hypothesis Testing - Basic definitions, t-test.

### Module - 2 (Introduction to Data Analytics)
* Introduction to Data Analysis - Analytics, Analytics Process Model, Analytical Model Requirements.
* Data Analytics Life Cycle overview.
* Basics of data collection, sampling, preprocessing and dimensionality reduction.

### Module - 3 (Predictive and Descriptive Analytics)
* Supervised Learning - Classification, Naive Bayes, KNN, Linear Regression.
* Unsupervised Learning - Clustering, Hierarchical algorithms – Agglomerative algorithm, Partitional algorithms - K-Means.
* Association Rule Mining - Apriori algorithm.

### Module - 4 (Big Data Analytics)
* Big Data Overview – State of the practice in analytics.
* Example Applications - Credit Risk Modeling, Business Process Analytics.
* Big Data Analytics using MapReduce and Apache Hadoop.
* Developing and Executing a Hadoop MapReduce Program.

### Module - 5 (R Programming for Data Analysis)
* Overview of modern data analytic tools.
* Data Analysis Using R - Introduction to R, R Graphical User Interfaces, Data Import and Export, Attribute and Data Types, Descriptive Statistics.
* Exploratory Data Analysis - Visualization Before Analysis, Dirty Data, Visualizing a Single Variable, Examining Multiple Variables, Data Exploration Versus Presentation, Statistical Methods for Evaluation.

## References
* Bart Baesens, *Analytics in a Big Data World: The Essential Guide to Data Science and its Business Intelligence and Analytic Trends*, John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
* David Dietrich, *EMC Education Services, Data Science and Big Data Analytics: Discovering, Analyzing, Visualizing and Presenting Data*, John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
* Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, *Data Mining Concepts and Techniques*, Elsevier, 2006.
* Christian Heumann and Michael Schomaker, *Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis*, Springer, 2016.
* Margaret H. Dunham, *Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics*, Pearson, 2012.
* Michael Berthold, David J. Hand, *Intelligent Data Analysis*, Springer, 2007.
