---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht401"
course_title: "chemical-process-equipment-design-i"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT401: Chemical Process Equipment Design I

## Course Objectives

- Develop the thermal design of double pipe exchangers for a given heat exchange operation between single-component fluids
- Develop the thermal design of shell and tube exchangers for a given heat exchange operation between single-component fluids
- Design tubular condensers for condensation of single-component fluids
- Develop the process design of evaporators for a given feed solution and terminal conditions
- Design mechanical draft cooling tower for a given tower fill

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Heat Exchangers)

- **Thermal design of double pipe heat exchanger:** Constructional features - Calculation of heat transfer area – estimation of heat transfer coefficient – calculation of the size of double pipe – pressure drop estimation in double pipe flow.
- **Thermal design of shell and tube heat exchanger:** Constructional features – baffles and pass partition – TEMA nomenclature – routing of fluids - Calculation of heat transfer area – estimation of tube bundle size - estimation of overall heat transfer coefficient using Bell's method – pressure drop in shell side and tube side.
- **Thermal design of shell and tube condensers:** For single component isothermal condensation of saturated vapours in shell. Estimation of heat transfer area – Estimation of bundle size and shell diameter - estimation of in-shell condensation coefficients using Dukler charts – estimation of overall heat transfer coefficient.

### Module - 2 (Evaporators and Cooling Towers)

- **Thermal design of evaporators:** Constructional features and design of short tube calandria evaporator, long tube evaporator, and forced circulation evaporator – estimation of heat transfer area in multiple effect evaporators with negligible boiling point rise (double/triple effect forward feed only) – effect of boiling point elevation in evaporator calculation.
- **Process design of mechanical draft Cooling Towers:** Estimation of air quantity, tower characteristics - number of diffusion units using graphical method, water concentration, tower cross section area, fan hp, make-up water requirement.

## References

- Perry. R.H & Green.D.W., _Chemical Engineers Handbook_, Mc-Graw Hill.
- Kern D.Q., _Process Heat Transfer_, Tata McGraw Hill.
- Badger & Bancharo, _Introduction to Chemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill.
- Coulson J.M.& Richardson J.F., _Chemical Engineering_, Vol.6, 3rd Edn, Butterworth Heinemann, (Indian print).
- M.V Joshi & Mahajan V.V., _Process Equipment Design_, 3rd Edn, Mac-Milan & Co. India.
- Datta B.K., _Heat Transfer: Principles and Applications_, Prentice Hall India.
- McCabe W.L., Smith J.C. & Harriott P., _Unit Operations in Chemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill.
- E. Ludwig, _Applied Process Design for Chemical & Petrochemical Plants_, Vol I, II, III, Gulf Publication, London.
- Standards of Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers Association.
