---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 5
course_code: "sw1543"
course_title: "theory-and-practice-of-counselling"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1543: Theory and Practice of Counselling

## Course Objectives
* To acquire a holistic understanding of counselling as a process and tool for intervention.
* To understand the process as well as skills to handle clients.
* To understand the principles to be abided by, while counselling individuals.
* To understand various approaches to the practice of counselling and therapy, and develop proficiency in at least one approach.

## Course Content
### Module I - Introduction to Counselling
* Counseling: meaning, definition, and scope
* Differentiating Guidance and Counseling
* Contexts: Remedial, Preventive, Developmental, Crisis
* Goals: Immediate and Long term

### Module II - Counselling Process and Principles
* Counseling process
* Counseling Principles: Genuineness, Acceptance, Confidentiality and Empathy, individualization

### Module III - Counselling Skills and Techniques
* Skills: listening and responding, handling emotions and problem solving, closure, Empathizing, Listening, Accepting, Clarifying, Analyzing, Interpreting, Dealing with emotions, Verbalizing, Challenging, Motivating (reinforcing), Decision making, Questioning, Communicating
* Techniques – initiating contact (rapport), establishing structure, interaction, attending behaviour, observation of non-verbal behavior
* Counsellor-Counselee relationship
* Aspects influencing Counselor-Counselee relationship: transference and counter transference

### Module IV - Group Counselling 
* Group Counseling: Definition, Meaning, Importance
* Structuring of Groups
* Process of Group Counseling
* Advantages and Limitations of Group Counseling

### Module V - Therapeutic and Applications of Counselling
* Approaches of Counseling: Directive, Non-directive and Eclectic
* Application of Therapy in Counseling: Client-Centered therapy, Psychoanalytical Psychotherapy, Behavioral Therapy, Transactional Analysis

## References
1. Nelson-Jones, R. (2004). *Basic Counselling Skills: A Helper's Manual* (4<sup>th</sup> Ed.). London: Sage.
2. Egan, G. (2010). *The Skilled Helper: A Problem-Management and Opportunity Development Approach to Helping* (9<sup>th</sup>Edn.). California: Cengage.
3. Nelson-Jones, R. (2004). Practical Counselling and Helping Skills (4<sup>th</sup>Edn.). London: Sage.
4. Zastrow, C.H. (2012). *Practice of Social Work* (10<sup>th</sup>Edn). CA: Cengage.
5. Antony, J.D. (2003). *Skills of Counselling: Micro-skill Model*. Tamilnadu: Anugraha Publications.
6. Tobbert, E.L: Introdution to counselling.
7. Colin Feltham, Controversies in psycho therapy and counselling, Sage publications, New Delhi, 1999.
8. Keith Tudor, Group Counselling, Sage Publications, New Delhi, 1999.
9. Don. C. Locke, Jane, E.Mayers, Edwin I.Iless, the Hand book of Counselling, Sage publication, International Educational and professional Publishers, New Delhi-2001.
10. Tara Chand Sharma, Modern Methods of Guidance and Guidance and Counselling Sarup & Son’s, New Delhi 2002.
### Online Reading
1. Theories of Psychotherapy & Counseling - Concepts and Cases (5<sup>th</sup> Edn.) http://file.zums.ac.ir/ebook/169-Theories%20of%20Psychotherapy%20&%20Counseling%20-%20Concepts%20and%20Cases,%205th%20Edition-Richard%20S.%20Sharf084.pdf