---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 6
course_code: "peaot635"
course_title: "vibration-and-aeroelasticity"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PEAOT635 - Vibration and Aeroelasticity

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the principles governing **vibration and aeroelasticity** in Aerospace structures.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Single Degree of Freedom Systems

-   **Vibration terminologies** and Simple Harmonic Motion.
-   Analysis of **damped and forced vibrations**, including support excitation, **vibration isolation**, and transmissibility.
-   Study of longitudinal, transverse, and torsional vibrations.

### Module 2: Several Degrees of Freedom Systems

-   Analysis of **Two Degrees of Freedom systems**, including coordinate coupling, principal modes, and vibration absorbers.
-   Introduction to **Multi-Degrees of Freedom systems** and vibrations of rectangular and circular plates.

### Module 3: Approximate Methods and Continuous Systems

-   **Approximate methods** for vibration analysis, including Rayleigh’s, Dunkley’s, Holzer’s, and Matrix Iteration methods.
-   Vibration analysis of **continuous systems** like strings, bars, beams, and shafts.

### Module 4: Aeroelasticity

-   Concepts of **Static and Dynamic Aeroelasticity** and the **Collar’s Triangle**.
-   Study of **aeroelastic instabilities** and their prevention, including **wing divergence**, loss and reversal of aileron control, and **flutter**.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Mechanical Vibrations* – V. P Singh, Dhanpat Rai & Co, 2014
-   *Principles of Aeroelasticity* – Rama B Bhat, CRC Press, 2016
-   *Mechanical Vibrations* – G.K. Grover, Nem Chand & Bros, 2009
-   *Principles of Vibration* – Tongue. B. H., Oxford University Press, 2000
-   *An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity* – Y.C. Fung, John Wiley & Sons, 2008

---
