---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "electronics-and-communication-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "3"
course_code: "hut200"
course_title: "professional-ethics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@alwynrejicser"
---

# HUT200: Professional Ethics

## Course Objectives

- Understand the core values that shape the ethical behaviour of a professional.  
- Adopt a good character and follow an ethical life.  
- Explain the role and responsibility in technological development by keeping personal ethics and legal ethics.  
- Solve moral and ethical problems through exploration and assessment by established experiments.  
- Apply the knowledge of human values and social values to contemporary ethical values and global issues.

## Course Content

### Module - 1

- Morals, values and Ethics.  
- Integrity, Academic integrity, Work Ethics, Service Learning, Civic Virtue.  
- Respect for others, Living peacefully, Caring and Sharing, Honesty, Courage.  
- Cooperation, Commitment, Empathy, Self Confidence, Social Expectations.

### Module - 2

- Senses of Engineering Ethics.  
- Variety of moral issues.  
- Types of inquiry.  
- Moral dilemmas, Moral Autonomy.  
- Kohlberg’s theory, Gilligan’s theory.  
- Consensus and Controversy.  
- Profession and Professionalism.  
- Models of professional roles.  
- Theories about right action – Self interest, Customs and Religion.  
- Uses of Ethical Theories.

### Module - 3

- Engineering as Experimentation.  
- Engineers as responsible Experimenters.  
- Codes of Ethics.  
- Plagiarism.  
- A balanced outlook on law.  
- Challenges case study – Bhopal gas tragedy.

### Module - 4

- Collegiality and loyalty.  
- Managing conflict.  
- Respect for authority.  
- Collective bargaining.  
- Confidentiality and its role in moral integrity.  
- Conflicts of interest.  
- Occupational crime.  
- Professional rights, Employee rights.  
- IPR, Discrimination.

### Module - 5

- Multinational Corporations.  
- Environmental Ethics.  
- Business Ethics.  
- Computer Ethics.  
- Role in Technological Development.  
- Engineers as Managers.  
- Consulting Engineers.  
- Engineers as Expert Witnesses and Advisors.  
- Moral leadership.

## References

- Mike W. Martin and Roland Schinzinger, *Ethics in Engineering*, 4th Edition, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Pvt Ltd, New Delhi, 2014.  
- Charles D. Fleddermann, *Engineering Ethics*, Pearson Education / Prentice Hall of India, New Jersey, 2004.  
- Charles E. Harris, Michael S. Pritchard and Michael J. Rabins, *Engineering Ethics: Concepts and Cases*, Wadsworth Thompson Learning, United States, 2005.  
- http://www.slideword.org/slidestag.aspx/human-values-and-Professional-ethics  
- M. Govindarajan, S. Natarajan and V. S. Senthil Kumar, *Engineering Ethics*, PHI Learning Private Ltd, New Delhi, 2012.  
- R. S. Naagarazan, *A Text Book on Professional Ethics and Human Values*, New Age International (P) Limited, New Delhi, 2006.  
