---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 1
course_code: "sw1121"
course_title: "introduction-to-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1121: Introduction to Social Work 

## Course Objectives
* To understand the history of Social Work Profession in India and abroad.
* To understand the basic values and principles of Social Work Profession.
* To understand the basic concepts relevant to Social Work Practice.

## Course Content

### Module I - Social Work
* Meaning, Definitions and Characteristics
* Basic Assumptions, Objectives
* Functions: Preventive, Curative, Restorative / Rehabilitative and Developmental Functions 
* Methods: Primary and Secondary
* Fields: Health, Correctional, Community Development, Industries, Vulnerable Communities (Children, Women, Youth, Elderly)

### Module II - Social Work and Related Concepts
* Meaning and Definition: Social Service, Social Welfare, Social Justice, Social Security, Social Policy, Social Defense
* Social movement, Social Reform, Social Development, voluntarism
* Social Legislation, Human Rights

### Module III - Historical Evolution of Social Work 
* Development of Professional Social Work –UK: Scientific charity, Elizabethan poor law, settlement house movement, Charity Organization Society, William Beveridge report, YMCA
* USA, India: ancient, medieval, modern,
* Social Work Education

### Module IV - Philosophy and Values of Social Work

* Religious Ideologies: Hinduism, Christianity, Islam and Buddhism
* Other Ideologies: Rationalism, Humanism, Liberalism and Secularism
* Basic Values of Social Work : Humanitarian, Democratic Values
* Principles of Social Work

### Module V - Social work as a Profession
* Profession-: Meaning, Characteristic: Body of Knowledge, system of imparting knowledge
* Professional Associations, Sanctions , Skills, Code of Ethics-NASW

## References
1. Zastrow Introduction to social work and social welfare, The Dorsey Press. 1996
2. Misra P.D. Social Work: Philosophy and Methods, Inter-India Publications. 1994
3. Desai Murli ideologies and social work Historical and Contemporary Analyses, Hyderabad: Rawat Publication, 2010.
4. Chowdhary, Paul D. Introduction to Social Work; history, concept, methods and fields, Atma Ram & Sons. 1984
5. Friedlander, Walter A. Concepts and Methods of Social Work, Prentice Hall of India Private Limited. 1964
6. Wadia A.R. History and philosophy of social work in India, Allied Pacific Private Limited. 1961
7. Zastrow H Charles, The Practice of Social Work, Brooks/Cole publishing company, USA, 1999, 6<sup>th</sup> edn.
8. Dubois, Brenda and Karla Krogsrud Miley. Social Work An Empowering Profession. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2002
