---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "gymat301"
course_title: "mathematics-for-electrical-science-and-physical-science-3"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# GYMAT301: Mathematics for Electrical Science and Physical Science - 3

## Course Objectives
1. To introduce the concept and applications of Fourier transforms in various engineering fields.
2. To introduce the basic theory of functions of a complex variable, including residue integration and conformal transformation, and their applications.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1: Fourier Integrals and Transforms
- Fourier Integral, From Fourier series to Fourier Integral.
- Fourier Cosine and Sine integrals, Fourier Cosine and Sine Transform, Linearity.
- Transforms of Derivatives, Fourier Transform and its inverse.
- Linearity, Transforms of Derivative.

### Module 2: Complex Functions and Conformal Mapping
- Complex Function, Limit, Continuity, Derivative, Analytic functions.
- Cauchy-Riemann Equations (without proof), Laplace's Equations.
- Harmonic functions, Finding harmonic conjugate.
- Conformal mapping, Mappings of $w=z^{2}$, $w=e^{z}$, $w=\frac{1}{z}$, $w=sinz$.

### Module 3: Complex Integration
- Line integrals in the complex plane (Definition & Basic properties).
- First evaluation method, Second evaluation method.
- Cauchy's integral theorem (without proof) on simply connected domain.
- Independence of path, Cauchy integral theorem on multiply connected domain (without proof), Cauchy Integral formula (without proof).

### Module 4: Series Expansion and Residue Theorem
- Taylor series and Maclaurin series, Laurent series (without proof).
- Singularities and Zeros: Isolated Singularity, Poles, Essential Singularities, Removable singularities, Zeros of Analytic functions.
- Poles and Zeros, Formulas for Residues, Residue theorem (without proof).
- Residue Integration- Integral of Rational Functions of $cos~\theta$ and $sin~\theta$.

---

## References

- Erwin Kreyszig, *Advanced Engineering Mathematics*, John Wiley & Sons, $10^{th}$ edition, 2016.
- Dennis G. Zill, Patrick D. Shanahan, *Complex Analysis*, Jones & Bartlett, $3^{rd}$ edition, 2015.
- B. V. Ramana, *Higher Engineering Mathematics*, McGraw-Hill Education, $39^{th}$ edition, 2023.
- B.S. Grewal, *Higher Engineering Mathematics*, Khanna Publishers, $44^{th}$ edition, 2018.
- K.R. Rao, Do Nyeon Kim, Jae Jeong Hwang, *Fast Fourier Transform - Algorithms and Applications*, Springer, $I^{st}$ edition, 2011.
