---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "electronics-and-communication-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "ect372"
course_title: "quantum-computing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@alwynrejicser"
---

# ECT372: Quantum Computing

## Course Objectives

- Explain the basic constructs in linear algebra needed to build the concepts of quantum computing.  
- Relate the postulates of quantum mechanics for computation and illustrate/demonstrate quantum measurement.  
- Identify quantum gates and build quantum circuit models in which most of the quantum algorithms are designed.  
- Analyse and design quantum algorithms and grasp the advantages they offer over classical counterparts.  

## Course Outcomes

- Apply linear algebra concepts essential for quantum computing.  
- Interpret and relate the fundamental postulates of quantum mechanics for quantum computation.  
- Design and analyze quantum gates and quantum circuits.  
- Demonstrate understanding of quantum measurements and associated principles.  
- Implement and evaluate basic quantum algorithms, highlighting their advantages over classical ones.  

## Course Content

### Module 1: Basics of Linear Algebra

- History and Overview of Quantum Computation and Quantum Information  
- Linear Algebra Basics  
- Linear Operators and Matrices  
- The Pauli Matrices  
- Inner Products  
- Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors  
- Hermitian Operators and Adjoints  
- Spectral Theorem  
- Tensor Products  

### Module 2: Basics of Quantum Mechanics

- State Space Representation - Bloch Sphere  
- State Evolution – Unitary Transformation  
- Quantum Measurement – Projective Measurements  
- Composite Systems  
- Superposition  

### Module 3: Quantum Gates and Circuits

- Quantum Gates – Hadamard Gate, NOT Gate, Controlled-NOT Gate, Toffoli Gate  
- Realisation of Classical Gates with Quantum Gates – Z Gate, Fredkin Gate  
- Pauli Matrices  
- Controlled Swap and Controlled U-operations  
- Circuit Identities  

### Module 4: Quantum Measurement

- Basic Principles of Quantum Measurement  
- Principle of Deferred Measurement  
- Principle of Implicit Measurement  
- Gates with Projective Measurements  
- Universal Quantum Gates  
- Universality of Two-Level Unitary Gates  

### Module 5: Algorithms

- Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT)  
- Quantum Circuit for QFT  
- Quantum Phase Estimation  
- Modular Exponentiation  
- Order Finding and Factorisation  
- Deutsch’s Algorithm  

## References

1. P. Kaye, R. Laflamme, and M. Mosca, *An Introduction to Quantum Computing*, Oxford, 2007.  
2. Eleanor G. Rieffel, Wolfgang H. Polak, *Quantum Computing: A Gentle Introduction*, MIT Press, 2011.  
3. Noson Yanofsky and Mirco Mannucci, *Quantum Computing for Computer Scientists*, Cambridge University Press, 2008.  
4. Abhijith, J., Adedoyin, A., Ambrosiano, J., et al., *Quantum Algorithm Implementations for Beginners*, arXiv:1804.03719, 2020.  
5. M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, *Quantum Computation and Quantum Information*, Cambridge University Press, 2010.  
6. J. Gruska, *Quantum Computing*, McGraw Hill, 1999.  
7. G. Strang, *Linear Algebra and its Applications* (4th Edition), Thomson, 2006.  

