---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "cst304"
course_title: "computer-graphics-and-image-processing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST304: Computer Graphics and Image Processing

## Course Objectives
* Describe the working principles of graphics devices.
* Illustrate line drawing, circle drawing and polygon filling algorithms.
* Demonstrate geometric representations, transformations on 2D & 3D objects, clipping algorithms and projection algorithms.
* Summarize visible surface detection methods.
* Summarize the concepts of digital image representation, processing and demonstrate pixel relationships.
* Solve image enhancement and segmentation problems using spatial domain techniques.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Basics of Computer Graphics and Algorithms)
* Basics of Computer Graphics and its applications.
* Video Display devices - Refresh Cathode Ray Tubes, Random Scan Displays and systems, Raster scan displays and systems.
* Line drawing algorithms - DDA, Bresenham’s algorithm.
* Circle drawing algorithms - Midpoint Circle generation algorithm, Bresenham’s algorithm.

### Module - 2 (Filled Area Primitives and Transformations)
* Filled Area Primitives - Scan line polygon filling, Boundary filling and flood filling.
* Two dimensional transformations - Translation, Rotation, Scaling, Reflection and Shearing, Composite transformations, Matrix representations and homogeneous coordinates.
* Basic 3D transformations.

### Module - 3 (Clipping and Projections)
* Window to viewport transformation.
* Cohen Sutherland Line clipping algorithm.
* Sutherland Hodgeman Polygon clipping algorithm.
* Three dimensional viewing pipeline.
* Projections - Parallel and Perspective projections.
* Visible surface detection algorithms - Depth buffer algorithm, Scan line algorithm.

### Module - 4 (Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing)
* Introduction to Image processing and applications.
* Image as 2D data. Image representation in Gray scale, Binary and Colour images.
* Fundamental steps in image processing. Components of image processing system.
* Coordinate conventions. Sampling and quantization. Spatial and Gray Level Resolution.
* Basic relationship between pixels – neighbourhood, adjacency, connectivity.
* Fundamentals of spatial domain - convolution operation.

### Module - 5 (Image Enhancement in Spatial Domain and Image Segmentation)
* Basic gray level transformation functions - Log transformations, Power-Law transformations, Contrast stretching.
* Histogram equalization.
* Basics of spatial filtering - Smoothing spatial filter (Linear and nonlinear filters) and Sharpening spatial filters - Gradient and Laplacian.
* Fundamentals of Image Segmentation.
* Thresholding - Basics of Intensity thresholding and Global Thresholding.
* Region based Approach - Region Growing, Region Splitting and Merging.
* Edge Detection - Edge Operators - Sobel and Prewitt.

## References
* Donald Hearn and M. Pauline Baker, *Computer Graphics*, PHI, 2e, 1996.
* Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods, *Digital Image Processing*, Pearson, 4e, 2017.
* William M. Newman and Robert F. Sproull, *Principles of Interactive Computer Graphics*, McGraw Hill, 2001.
* Zhigang Xiang and Roy Plastock, *Computer Graphics (Schaum’s Outline Series)*, McGraw Hill, 2019.
* David F. Rogers, *Procedural Elements for Computer Graphics*, Tata McGraw Hill, 2001.
* M. Sonka, V. Hlavac, and R. Boyle, *Image Processing, Analysis, and Machine Vision*, Thomson India Edition, 4e, 2017.
