---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht426"
course_title: "petrochemicals-and-fertilizers"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT426: Petrochemicals and Fertilizers

## Course Objectives

- Describe the manufacturing process for C1 and C2 compounds.
- Describe the manufacturing process for C3 and C4 compounds.
- Explain the manufacturing process for Aromatic Compounds and characterize fertilizers on the basis of different properties.
- Describe the relevant manufacturing process for Nitrogenous fertilizers.
- Explain the relevant manufacturing process for potassic and miscellaneous fertilizers.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: C1 and C2 Compounds (7 Hrs.)

- **C1 Compounds:** Process Description, flow diagram, Physical Properties and uses of -Methanol via synthesis gas route, Formaldehyde from methanol, Chloromethane by direct chlorination of methane, Trichloroethylene, Perchloroethyene by Pyrolysis of carbon tetrachloride.
- **C2 Compounds:** Process Description, flow diagram, Physical Properties and uses of -Ethylene and acetylene Production by steam cracking of hydrocarbons, Ethylene dichloride, Vinyl Chloride via ethylene dichloride pyrolysis, Ethylene oxide by oxidation of ethylene, Ethanol amines from ethylene oxide and Ammonia.

### Module - 2: C3 and C4 Compounds (6 Hrs.)

- **C3 Compounds:** Process Description, flow diagram, Physical Properties and uses of -Isopropanol by hydration of propylene, Acetone by dehydrogenation of Isopropanol, Acrylonitrile from Propylene Ammonia Oxidation, Isoprene from propylene dimmer, Propylene Oxide via Chlorohydrins.
- **C4 Compounds:** Process Description, flow diagram, Physical Properties and uses of -Butadiene from Dehydrogenation of butane, Butadiene by Oxydehydrogenation, Butadiene from ethanol, Butadiene from steam cracking f hydrocarbons.

### Module - 3: Aromatics and Overview of Fertilizer (8 Hrs.)

- **Aromatics:** Process Description, flow diagram, Physical Properties and uses of –Benzene from Alkyl Aromatics, Phenol by Cumene Process, Phenol from toluene Oxidation, Styrene from benzene and ethylene, Phthalic anhydride by Oxidation of Naphthalene.
- **Overview of Fertilizer:** Synthetic fertilizers, Classification of fertilizers, Role of essential Elements in plant Growth, Macro elements and Micro elements, Application of fertilizers considering Nutrient, Balance and types of crop. Development of fertilizer industry; Fertilizer production and consumption in India; Nutrient contents of fertilizers; Secondary nutrients; Feedstock and raw materials for nitrogenous, phosphatic and potassic fertilizers.

### Module - 4: Nitrogenous Fertilizers (8 Hrs.)

- **Introduction to Nitric acid:** Chemical, physical properties and applications, Manufacturing of Nitric Acid by Pressure ammonia oxidation process and Intermediate pressure ammonia oxidation process.
- **Urea:** Physical, chemical properties, Manufacturing of Urea by Stamicarbon's CO2 stripping process, Toyo-Koatsu total recycle process.
- **Other nitrogenous fertilizers:** Manufacturing of Ammonium nitrate by Prilling process, Ammonium sulphate from Ammonium carbonate and gypsum, Ammonium chloride from Ammonium sulphate and sodium chloride.

### Module - 5: Potassium Fertilizers and Miscellaneous Fertilizer (6 Hrs.)

- **Potassium Fertilizers:** Physical, chemical properties and uses of Potassium Chloride, Potassium nitrate, Potassium sulphate, Manufacturing of potassium chloride from sylvinite, Preparation of Potassium nitrate, Potassium sulphate.
- **Miscellaneous Fertilizers:** Manufacturing of NPK, Ammonium Sulphate Phosphate (ASP), Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (CAN).

## References

- G H Collings, _Commercial Fertiliser_, 5th Edition, MCGraw Hill, New York, 1955.
- Slacks, A.V., _Chemistry & Technology of Fertilizers_, Interscience, New York, 1966.
- Kirk-Othmer, _Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology_, 4th Edition, 1993, Wiley – Inter Science Publication, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
- Editorial Board-Hand book Fertilizer Technology, The Fertiliser Association of India, New Delhi, 1998.
- M. Gopala Rao & Marshall Sittig, _Dryden's Outlines of Chemical Technology_, East-West Press, 3rd Edition, New Delhi.
- Austin G. T, _Shreve's Chemical Process Industries_, 5th edition, Mc. Graw Hill Publications.
- Pandey & Shukla, _Chemical Technology_, Volume I & II, 2nd Edition, Vani Books Company.
- N S Subba Rao, _Bio fertilizers in Agriculture_, Oxford & IBH Publishing Company.
- Dr. B.K.Bhaskararao _A Text on Petro Chemicals_ 1st Edition, Khanna Publishers.
