---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht418"
course_title: "solid-waste-management"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT418: Solid Waste Management

## Course Objectives

- Explain municipal solid waste management systems with respect to its physical, chemical and biological properties.
- Select appropriate methods for solid waste collection and optimize the route for transportation.
- Understand the design and operation of landfills.
- Compare disposal methods of MSW by applying specific criteria.
- Understand the recovery and recycling methods of waste management.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Solid Waste Characteristics and Generation

Solid wastes-Sources, nature and characteristics - types of solid waste, Residential, Commercial, Hazardous wastes, and Industrial wastes, Properties of Solid wastes, Waste generation, Sampling and analysis, Characteristics of solid wastes - Energy content, Chemical content, Estimation of chemical composition of a solid waste sample. Generation rates - Estimation of solid waste quantities - Factors affecting generation rates.

### Module - 2: Collection and Transportation Systems

Collection of solid waste, On-site storage methods-containers, their type, size and location, Collection Systems-Vehicles, Types of collection system –HCS, SCS, Determination of vehicle and labor requirements, Collection routing, route balancing and transfer stations, Transfer methods, Processing methods.

### Module - 3: Disposal Methods and Landfill Design

Disposal methods such as sanitary landfill –methods, leachate in landfills – control of leachate movement, Gas movement – control, Design and operation of landfills, Landfarming, deep well injection etc.

### Module - 4: Treatment Technologies

Composting, Factors affecting composting, Aerobic composting and anaerobic digestion, Design principles. Incineration, Municipal incinerators, Grates, Furnances, Design principles, Pyrolysis of solid waste.

### Module - 5: Recovery and Integrated Management

Recovery, Recycle and Reuse-Material and Energy recovery operations. Overview of solid waste management practices in India. Industrial and Hazardous solid waste management, Integrated Waste Management (IWM), Basics of Data base Management System (DBMS), Geographic Information System (GIS) and Remote Sensing data in planning and management of MSW.

## References

- Howard S.Peavy, Donald R.Rowe, George Tchobanoglous, _Environmental Engineering_, Mc Graw Hill. New York, 1985.
- Frank Kreith, George Tchobanoglous, _Handbook of Solid Waste Management_, McGraw Hill Publishers, 2002.
- P.Aarne Vesilind and William Worrell, _Solid waste Engineering_, Cengage Learning, Asia Pte Limited, 2012.
- Gerard Kiely, _Environmental Engineering_, McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2008.
- Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff, _Handbook of Solid Waste Management and Waste Minimization Technologies_, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2002.
- Luis F. Diaz, George M. Savage, Linda L. Eggerth, Larry, Rosenberg, _Solid Waste Management_, United Nations Environment Programme, Paris, 2005.
