---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht458"
course_title: "safety-engineering-of-process-plants"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT458: Safety Engineering of Process Plants

## Course Objectives

- Impart the basic concepts of safety in Process Industries.
- Apply the chemical engineering fundamentals in the chemical hazards prevention techniques.
- Understand the physical hazards and human factors in process safety.
- Develop an understanding about safety practices in industries and emergency planning.
- Identify various hazards associated with chemical process industries using various techniques and knowledge of risk.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction to process safety (7 Hrs.)

Introduction to process safety: Concept and importance of process safety. Safety in the site selection and lay out. Review of Industrial Accidents- Major Chemical Industry Accidents, Bhopal, Flixborough, SEVESO. Cost of accidents. Material safety data sheet (MSDS). Work permit system, Personal Protective Equipments (PPE). Regulatory Bodies: - National safety council, OSHA, Loss prevention association, PESO, NEBOSH.

### Module - 2: Chemical Hazards (8 Hrs.)

Chemical Hazards- Fire triangle, LFL,UFL, Types of fire- Pool fire, jet fire, Flash fire and Fire ball. Fire prevention techniques in process industry. Flammability diagram- construction and application. Explosion- Deflagration, Detonation, UVCE, BLEVE and Dust explosion. Prevention techniques for explosion. Toxic release: - Types of exposure, Measure of toxicity, Types of toxic effects. Run away reactions and their mitigation.

### Module - 3: Process and Plant hazards (6 Hrs.)

Process and Plant hazards: Physical hazards- Atmospheric contaminants, Sound, Light, Radiation, Pressure, and Temperature. Electrical hazards- electric shock, flash over, lightning Strokes. Mechanical hazards. Environmental hazards. Human Errors- People Oriented Errors, Situation Oriented errors, System oriented errors. Ergonomics.

### Module - 4: Prevention techniques for hazards (7 Hrs.)

Prevention techniques for hazards. Hazardous area classification. Safety in transportation of hazardous chemicals by road-HAZCHEM CODE, TREM CARD, Relief system and Detectors. Flame arresters and Flare system. Hazard rating of chemical plants- Dow fire, explosion and Toxicity index. Chemical exposure index. Emergency planning-onsite and offsite emergency planning, Mock drill.

### Module - 5: Hazard identification and Risk (7 Hrs.)

Hazard identification and Risk: HAZOP, Bow tie diagram, Fault tree analysis, failure mode and effect analysis, Event tree analysis, Layer of protection analysis. Examples. Quantitative Risk Assessment (methodology only), Probit equations, FN curves, Risk-individual risk, societal risk. Safety integrity level (SIL). The concept of inherent safety and Reliability. Security in process industries.

## References

- B. K. Bhaskara Rao, Er. R. K. Jain, Vineet Kumar, _"Safety in Chemical Plants/Industry and Its Management"_, Khanna Publishers, First edition, 2010
- Daniel A. Crowl/ Joseph F. Louvar, _Chemical Process Safety Fundamentals with applications_, Prentice Hall international series, Second edition.
- K.S.N Raju, _Chemical Process Industrial safety_, McGraw Hill, 2014.
- Ralph King, _Safety in the Process Industries_, Butterworth-Heinemann.
- R.K.Jain & Sunil S Rao, _Industrial Safety, Health and Environment Management Systems_, Khanna Publishers, Fourth Edition, 2000
- _Encyclopaedia of Occupational Health & Safety_, International labour Office, Geneva, 2012
- Frank P. Lees- _"Loss Prevention in Process Industries"_, Vol.1,2&3, Second Edn, Butterworth-Heinemann.1996
- _Guidelines for Hazard Evaluation Procedure_. Centre for Chemical Process Safety.AICHE, 1992
- K.V. Raghavan and A. A. Khan: _Methodologies in Hazard Identification and assessment Manual_ by CLRI, December 1990.
