---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "gymat301"
course_title: "mathematics-for-physical-science-3"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# GYMAT301 - Mathematics for Physical Science – 3

## Course Objectives

1.  To introduce the concept and applications of Fourier transforms in various engineering fields.
2.  To introduce the basic theory of functions of a complex variable, including residue integration and conformal transformation, and their applications.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Fourier Transforms

-   Fourier integrals, Fourier Cosine and Sine transforms, and the Fourier Transform with its inverse. Properties including linearity and transforms of derivatives.

### Module 2: Complex Functions and Conformal Mapping

-   Analytic functions, Cauchy-Riemann Equations, and harmonic functions. Conformal mapping of elementary functions like $z^2$, $e^z$, $1/z$, and $\sin(z)$.

### Module 3: Complex Integration

-   Line integrals in the complex plane. Application of Cauchy’s integral theorem for simply and multiply connected domains and Cauchy's integral formula.

### Module 4: Series and Residue Integration

-   Taylor, Maclaurin, and Laurent series expansions. Classification of singularities and zeros. Application of the Residue theorem to evaluate real integrals.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Advanced Engineering Mathematics* – Erwin Kreyszig, John Wiley & Sons, 10th edition, 2016
-   *Complex Analysis* – Dennis G. Zill, Patrick D. Shanahan, Jones & Bartlett, 3rd edition, 2015
-   *Higher Engineering Mathematics* – B. V. Ramana, McGraw-Hill, 39th edition, 2023
-   *Higher Engineering Mathematics* – B.S. Grewal, Khanna Publishers, 44th edition, 2018
-   *Fast Fourier Transform - Algorithms and Applications* – K.R. Rao, Do Nyeon Kim, Jae Jeong Hwang, Springer, 1st edition, 2011

---
