---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "pcaot303"
course_title: "mechanics-of-aircraft-materials"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PCAOT303 - Mechanics of Aircraft Materials

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the concepts of stress, strain, and deformation under the influence of various loads.
2.  To assess the stresses and deformation in simple structural members like beams, bars, and shafts.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to Stress and Strain

-   Fundamental concepts of Stress, Strain, and Poisson’s ratio. Analysis of stress-strain curves for various materials. Hooke’s law, material constants, stress/strain tensors, and factor of safety.

### Module 2: Deformation in Axially Loaded Bars

-   Calculation of stresses and deformation in straight, stepped, tapered, and composite bars due to axial loads and temperature changes. Concepts of strain energy, resilience, and toughness.

### Module 3: Analysis of Beams

-   Types of beams, supports, and loads. Determination of support reactions. Drawing Shear Force and Bending Moment diagrams for cantilever and simply supported beams under various loading conditions.

### Module 4: Flexural and Torsional Stresses

-   Theory of simple bending and derivation of the bending equation. Torsion equation for solid and hollow circular shafts. Analysis of stresses on inclined planes using Mohr’s circle to find principal stresses.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Mechanics of Materials* – James Gere & Barry Goodno, Thomson-Engineering, 9th Edition, 2022
-   *Strength of Materials* – S. Ramamrutham & R. Narayanan, Dhanpat Rai Publishing, 20th Edition, 2020
-   *A Textbook of Strength of Materials - Mechanics of Solids* – Bansal R. K., Laxmi Publications, 6th Edition, 2022
-   *Strength of Materials* – S. S. Rattan, McGraw Hill Education India, 2nd edition, 2011
-   *Aircraft Materials and Processes* – Titterton.G, Pitman Publishing, 5th Edition, 1995
-   *Strength of Materials* – R. Subramanian, Oxford University, 3rd Edition, 2016

---
