---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "pbaot304"
course_title: "fluid-mechanics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PBAOT304 - Fluid Mechanics

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics.
2.  To analyse the effects of pressure, velocity, and density of fluids on various bodies.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to Fluid Mechanics

-   Properties of fluids, Newton’s law of viscosity. Fluid Statics: pressure-density-height relationship, manometers, buoyancy, and stability of immersed and floating bodies.

### Module 2: Fluid Kinematics and Dynamics

-   Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches to fluid flow. Bernoulli’s equation, Venturimeter, and Orifice meters. Introduction to Navier-Stokes equations. Dimensional analysis using Buckingham’s Pi-theorem.

### Module 3: Viscous Flow and Head Loss

-   Viscous flow through ducts and parallel plates. Reynolds experiment. Calculation of frictional (major) and minor losses in pipe flow. Hydraulic gradient and total energy line.

### Module 4: Boundary Layer Theory

-   Growth of the boundary layer over a flat plate. Definitions of displacement, momentum, and energy thickness. Laminar and turbulent boundary layers. Von-Karman momentum integral equations, drag, and boundary layer separation. Impact of jets on moving plates.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines* – R K Bansal, McGraw Hill, 6th Edition
-   *Fluid Mechanics, Fundamental and application* – Yunus A. Cengal, McGraw Hill, 7th edition
-   *Fluid Mechanics* – Pijush K. Kundu, McGraw Hill, 2th edition
-   *Fluid Mechanics* – Frank M. White, McGraw Hill, 8th edition
-   *Hydraulic and Fluid Mechanics* – Dr. Modi & S M Seth, Amit Publishers and distributors

---
