---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "common"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "uchut347"
course_title: "engineering-ethics-and-sustainable-development"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# UCHUT347 - Engineering Ethics and Sustainable Development

## Course Objectives

1.  To equip students with the skills to make ethical decisions and implement gender-sensitive practices.
2.  To develop a holistic approach to engineering ethics from the perspective of environmental protection and sustainable development.
3.  To develop the ability to find and implement strategies for sustainable engineering solutions.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Engineering Ethics and Gender Studies

-  Fundamentals of ethics - Personal vs. professional ethics, Civic Virtue,
Respect for others, Profession and Professionalism, Ingenuity, diligence
and responsibility, Integrity in design, development, and research domains,
Plagiarism, a balanced outlook on law - challenges - case studies,
Technology and digital revolution-Data, information, and knowledge,
Cybertrust and cybersecurity, Data collection & management, High
technologies: connecting people and places-accessibility and social
impacts, Managing conflict, Collective bargaining, Confidentiality, Role
of confidentiality in moral integrity, Codes of Ethics.
Basic concepts in Gender Studies - sex, gender, sexuality, gender
spectrum: beyond the binary, gender identity, gender expression, gender
stereotypes, Gender disparity and discrimination in education,
employment and everyday life, History of women in Science & Technology,
Gendered technologies & innovations, Ethical values and practices in
connection with gender - equity, diversity & gender justice, Gender policy
and women/transgender empowerment initiatives. 


### Module 2: Environmental Ethics and Sustainable Principles

-  Introduction to Environmental Ethics: Definition, importance and
historical development of environmental ethics, key philosophical theories
(anthropocentrism, biocentrism, ecocentrism). Sustainable Engineering
Principles: Definition and scope, triple bottom line (economic, social and
environmental sustainability), life cycle analysis and sustainability metrics.
Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Basics of ecosystems and their functions,
Importance of biodiversity and its conservation, Human impact on
ecosystems and biodiversity loss, An overview of various ecosystems in
Kerala/India, and its significance. Landscape and Urban Ecology:
Principles of landscape ecology, Urbanization and its environmental impact,
Sustainable urban planning and green infrastructure.


### Module 3: Sustainable Resource Management

-    Basics of hydrology and water cycle,
Water scarcity and pollution issues, Sustainable water management practices,
Environmental flow, disruptions and disasters. Zero Waste Concepts and
Practices: Definition of zero waste and its principles, Strategies for waste
reduction, reuse, reduce and recycling, Case studies of successful zero waste
initiatives. Circular Economy and Degrowth: Introduction to the circular
economy model, Differences between linear and circular economies,
degrowth principles, Strategies for implementing circular economy practices
and degrowth principles in engineering. Mobility and Sustainable
Transportation: Impacts of transportation on the environment and climate,
Basic tenets of a Sustainable Transportation design, Sustainable urban
mobility solutions, Integrated mobility systems, E-Mobility, Existing and
upcoming models of sustainable mobility solutions.

### Module 4: Climate Change, Technology, and Policy

-    Overview of renewable
energy sources (solar, wind, hydro, biomass), Sustainable technologies in
energy production and consumption, Challenges and opportunities in
renewable energy adoption. Climate Change and Engineering Solutions:
Basics of climate change science, Impact of climate change on natural and
human systems, Kerala/India and the Climate crisis, Engineering solutions to
mitigate, adapt and build resilience to climate change. Environmental
Policies and Regulations: Overview of key environmental policies and
regulations (national and international), Role of engineers in policy
implementation and compliance, Ethical considerations in environmental
policy-making. Case Studies and Future Directions: Analysis of realworld case studies, Emerging trends and future directions in environmental
ethics and sustainability, Discussion on the role of engineers in promoting a
sustainable future.


---

## Reference Books

-   *Ethics in Engineering Practice and Research* – Caroline Whitbeck, Cambridge University Press & Assessment, 2nd edition, 2011
-   *Virtue Ethics and Professional Roles* – Justin Oakley, Cambridge University Press & Assessment, 2006
-   *Sustainability Science* – Bert J. M. de Vries, Cambridge University Press & Assessment, 2nd edition, 2023
-   *Sustainable Engineering Principles and Practice* – Bhavik R. Bakshi, Cambridge University Press & Assessment, 2019
-   *Engineering Ethics* – M Govindarajan, S Natarajan and V S Senthil Kumar, PHI Learning, 2012
-   *Professional ethics and human values* – RS Naagarazan, New age international, 2006
-   *Ethics in Engineering* – Mike W Martin and Roland Schinzinger, Tata McGraw Hill, 4th edition, 2014

---
