---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht456"
course_title: "ceramic-technology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT456: Ceramic Technology

## Course Objectives

- Develop an understanding about ceramics, pottery and glassware.
- Create a perspective about glasses and its manufacture.
- Analyse refractories and its manufacture.
- Gain knowledge about electro ceramics and its manufacture.
- Develop mastery in bio ceramics and its manufacture.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction to Ceramics and Pottery (7 Hrs.)

Definition & scope of ceramics and ceramic materials, classification of ceramic materials conventional and advanced ceramics. Pottery &Whitewares: Classification and type of pottery &whitewares, Elementary idea of manufacturing process technology including body preparation, basic properties and application areas.

### Module - 2: Glass Technology

Glass: Definition of glass, glass raw materials and their functions, elementary concept of glass manufacturing process specially for container glass, different types of glasses, application of glasses.

### Module - 3: Refractories and Cement

Refractories: Definition of refractory, properties of refractories, classification of refractory, manufacturing process, basic areas of application specially in steel plant. Cement & Concrete: Concept of hydraulic materials, raw materials and manufacturing process, basic compositions, setting and hardening, concrete.

### Module - 4: Electro Ceramics

Electro Ceramics. Ceramic Capacitors: Ferroelectric ceramic materials; Relaxor ferroelectrics; Basic Ceramic Dielectric formulation for capacitors; Grain Boundary Barrier Layer Capacitors, Multi-layer Capacitors.Ceramic Magnets: Soft and hard ferrites. Ni-Zn ferrites, Mn-Zn ferrites, Garnets and Hexagonal Ferrites. Processing and manufacture of ferrites. Applications of magnetic ceramics.

### Module - 5: BioCeramics

BioCeramics.Definition and scope of bio-materials.Classification of bio-ceramic materials.Alumina and zirconia in surgical implants and their coatings.Bioactive glasses and glass ceramics with their clinical applications, Resorbablebioceramics, Characterization of bio-ceramics.

## References

- F.H Norton, _Elements of Ceramics_ Addison-Wesley Press; 1st edition, January 1, 1952
- Barsoum, _Fundamentals of Ceramics_, CRC Press; 1st edition, 27 November 2002
- W.D Kingery, _Introduction to Ceramics_, Wiley, May 1976
- Singer &Singer, _Industrial Ceramics_, Springer Netherlands, June 1963.
- _Foundations of materials science and engineering_, McGraw-Hill Education, 1993
- J. H. Chester, _Refractories_, CRC Press; 2nd edition, 31 December 1983
- A. Paul, _Chemistry of Glasses_, Springer 1 July 1982
- SudhirSen, _Ceramic Whitewares_, Oxford& IBH publishing, 1992
- F.M. Lea, _Chemistry of cement_, Chemical Publishing Co Inc.,U.S.; 3 September 1971
- R.C Buchanon, _Ceramic Materials for Electronics: Processing, Properties and Applications_, Marcel Dekker Inc, 29 May 1986
