---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht476"
course_title: "enzyme-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT476: Enzyme Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Classify enzymes along with their applications in different fields.
- Analyze enzyme kinetics and apply the same in the design of reactors.
- Outline the types and methods of immobilization of enzymes.
- Summarize the various types of enzyme reaction systems and reactors.
- Explain the application of enzymes in health care, environment and industry.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Classification and Production of Enzymes (7 Hrs.)

Classification and Production of Enzymes: Classification of enzymes, commercial application of enzymes in food, pharmaceutical and other industries. Enzymes for analytical and diagnostic applications. Production and purification of crude enzymes. Extracts from plant, animal and microbial sources.

### Module - 2: Mechanism of Enzyme Action (7 Hrs.)

Mechanism of Enzyme Action: Concept of active site, enzyme-substrate complex and enzyme action. Simple enzyme kinetics with one substrate. Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Evaluation of parameters in Michaelis-Menten kinetic equation. Types of inhibition. Influences of pH, temperature, fluid forces, chemical agents and irradiation on chemical activity.

### Module - 3: Enzyme Immobilization (7 Hrs.)

Enzyme Immobilization: Physical and chemical techniques for enzyme immobilization, adsorption, matrix entrapment, encapsulation, cross-linking, covalent binding. Advantages and disadvantages of different immobilization techniques. Application of immobilized enzyme systems. Mass Transfer effects in immobilized enzyme systems. Analysis of film and pore diffusion effects on kinetics of immobilized enzyme reactions.

### Module - 4: Reactors and Operations (7 Hrs.)

Reactors and Operations: Batch operation of a stirred reactor, Time course for batch enzyme reaction. Continuous operation in a stirred tank reactor. Immobilized enzyme reaction in a CSTR and plug flow reactor.

### Module - 5: Applications (7 Hrs.)

Applications: Enzyme biosensors. Application of enzymes in analysis, design of enzyme electrodes and their application in industry, healthcare and environment.

## References

- Gerharts, W. _"Enzymes in Industry – Production and application"_
- James E Bailley & David F Ollis, _Biochemical Engineering Fundamentals_, McGraw Hill
- Pauline M. Doran, _"Biochemical Engineering Principles"_, Academic Press.
- Taylor R.F. (Ed.) _"Protein immobilization – Fundamentals and application"_
- Zubay G., _Biochemistry_, Maxwell Macmillan International Education
- Rao, D.G., _Introduction to Biochemical Engineering_, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company
