---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht438"
course_title: "process-optimization"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT438: Process Optimization

## Course Objectives

- Identify the importance and values of mathematical modelling and Process Optimization to analyze and design any chemical process.
- Formulate Linear and non-linear Programming models to develop mathematical models of basic Chemical Engineering problems.
- Apply Linear and non-linear optimization techniques and algorithms to solve basic Chemical Engineering problems.
- Understand the concept and solve various multivariable optimization problems.
- Apply different optimization techniques in Chemical Engineering process design.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction to Process optimization & overview of mathematical functions (8 Hrs.)

Introduction to Process optimization & overview of mathematical functions: Scope and hierarchy of optimization, Typical chemical engineering applications of optimization. Statement of an Optimization Problem and its essential features, Classification of Optimization Problems and its essential features. Mathematical modelling of typical chemical engineering optimization problems. Nature and classification of mathematical functions, Graphical representation of univariate and bivariate functions (using MATLAB / Python etc.). Unimodal functions, determination of convexity and concavity of single and multivariate functions.

### Module - 2: Analytical & Numerical methods for unconstrained optimization problems (7 Hrs.)

Analytical & Numerical methods for unconstrained optimization problems: Analytical methods: Necessary and sufficient conditions for optimum of univariate unconstrained functions. Numerical methods: One dimensional gradient-free search methods (Fixed & accelerated step size, Dichotomous search, Fibonacci search, golden-section method and quadratic interpolation), One dimensional gradient search methods (Newton's method and Quasi-Newton method).

### Module - 3: Analytical methods for constrained multivariate optimization problems (6 Hrs.)

Analytical methods for constrained multivariate optimization problems: Nonlinear programming with equality constraints: method of direct substitution, Lagrange multiplier method, Nonlinear programming with inequality constraints: Kuhn-Tucker conditions for local optimality, Complex method, Rosen's gradient projection method.

### Module - 4: Numerical methods for unconstrained & constrained multivariate optimization problem (7 Hrs.)

Numerical methods for unconstrained & constrained multivariate optimization problems: Unconstrained multivariate optimization problems: Univariate search, Powell's method, method of steepest descent, Fletcher-Reeve's conjugate-gradient method, Newton's method. Constrained multivariate optimization problems: Basic concepts and graphical representation of Linear programming, graphical solution, Simplex method and two-phase simplex method.

### Module - 5: Optimization case studies in chemical engineering (7 Hrs.)

Optimization case studies in chemical engineering: Economic considerations: Capital cost, operating cost, raw material cost, processing cost etc., Various measures of profitability. Problems solvable analytically: Minimize the capital cost of cylindrical pressure vessel with flat and closed ends-Optimum thermal insulation thickness for cylindrical pipe, Optimum intermediate concentration and time of reaction for series reaction in batch reactor, Optimum pipe diameter for an incompressible fluid, Minimum work done on two and three-stage compressor for isentropic compression of ideal gas. Problems solvable numerically: Optimum reflux ratio for a staged distillation column, Fitting vapor-liquid equilibrium data using nonlinear regression, optimum design of shell-and-tube heat exchanger, optimization of a thermal cracker using linear programming.

## References

- Edgar T. F., Himmelblau D. M., _"Optimisation of Chemical Processes"_, McGraw Hill.
- Rao S.S., _"Optimization: Theory and Applications"_, Wiley Eastern.
- Louis Theodore and Kelly Behan, _"Introduction to Optimization for Environmental and Chemical Engineers"_, CRC press.
- Rajesh Kumar Arora, _"OPTIMIZATION Algorithms and Applications"_, CRC press
- Philip D.T. and Ravindran A., _"Operations Research"_, John Wiley.
- Beightler C.S., Phillips D.T. & Wilde D.J., _Foundations of Optimization_, Prentice Hall of India
- Beveridge G.S.G. & Schechter R.S., _Optimization: Theory & Practice_, McGraw Hill
