---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "group-a"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "pccst205"
course_title: "discrete-mathematics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@stippusahib"
---

# PCCST205: Discrete Mathematics

## Course Objectives
* To equip students with the ability to analyze and solve problems using discrete mathematical techniques.
* To give a deeper understanding of mathematical logic, set theory, and proof techniques such as direct proofs, proof by contradiction, and mathematical induction.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Sets, Functions, and Relations)
* Sets and Subsets, Venn Diagrams, Set Operations, Set Identities, Generalized Unions and Intersections.
* The Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion (Basic and Generalized versions), and applications. 
* Function definition, Injections, Surjections and Bijections, Inverse Functions, and Compositions of Functions. 
* Cardinality of Sets, Cantor diagonalization argument. 
* Relations and Their Properties, Composition of relations, n-ary Relations, Representing Relations Using Matrices. 
* Equivalence Relations, Equivalence Classes, Partial Orderings, Hasse Diagrams, Maximal and Minimal Elements, Lattices.

### Module - 2 (Mathematical Logic and Proofs)
* Propositional Logic, Applications of Propositional Logic, Propositional Equivalences. 
* Predicates and Quantifiers, Nested Quantifiers, Rules of Inference. 
* Introduction to Proofs, Methods of Proving Theorems - Direct proof, Indirect proof (Proof by Contraposition), Proof by Contradiction, Proof by counter examples. 
* The Pigeonhole Principle.

### Module - 3 (Induction and Recurrences)
* Mathematical Induction, Weak and Strong induction. 
* Recursive (Inductive) definitions and recurrence relations, Modeling with Recurrence Relations. 
* Solving Linear Recurrence Relations (homogeneous and nonhomogeneous). 
* Generating Functions, Using Generating Functions to Solve Recurrence Relations.

### Module - 4 (Group Theory)
* Groups - Definition, Examples, and Elementary Properties. 
* Abelian group, Permutation group, Subgroup. 
* Homomorphisms, Isomorphisms, and Cyclic Groups. 
* Cosets and Lagrange's Theorem.

## References
* Kenneth H. Rosen, Kamala Krithivasan, Discrete Mathematics and its Applications, McGraw Hill, 8th edition, 2021. 
* Marc Lipson, Seymour Lipschutz, Schaum's Outline of Discrete Mathematics, McGraw-Hill, 3rd edition, 2021. 
* Kenneth A. Ross, Charles R.B. Wright, Discrete Mathematics, Pearson, 5th edition, 2012. 
*
