---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechatronics"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "mrt203"
course_title: "analog-and-digital-electronics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# MRT203: Analog and Digital Electronics

## Course Objectives

* Understand the working of amplifiers and oscillators.
* Familiarisation of Op-amp and its different applications.
* Analysis of multivibrators and principles of PLL.
* Learn different simplification methods in digital electronics and also learn to design its combinational circuits.
* Design of sequential circuits.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Amplifiers & Oscillators)

* **BJT as an amplifier** - CE configuration.  
* **Feedback concept**.  
* **FET** - construction and characteristics of JFET & MOSFET - Comparison of BJT & FET.  
* **Power amplifiers** - Class A, B, AB & C amplifiers.  
* **Oscillators** - Barkhausen criteria - Classification - Analysis of RC phase shift oscillators - Working of Hartley and Colpitts Oscillator.

### Module - 2 (Op-amp & Its Applications)

* **Op-amp** - Ideal characteristics – offset voltage & offset current – frequency response.  
* **Feedback amplifiers** - Voltage series feedback and shunt feedback amplifiers.  
* **Applications** - Integrator, Differentiator, Comparator, Sample & Hold (S/H), Isolation amplifier, V/I & I/V Converter.

### Module - 3 (Filters & Timers)

* **Active Filters** - Analysis of first order LPF & HPF filter - Working of Band Pass & Band stop Filters.  
* **Timer IC 555** - Functional diagram, Astable and Monostable modes.  
* **Phase Locked Loops (PLL)** - Principles - Building blocks of PLL - VCO - Lock and capture ranges - Capture process - Frequency multiplication using PLL.

### Module - 4 (Digital Circuits)

* **Logic gates** - De-Morgan’s theorem.  
* **Boolean function minimization** - K-Map and Quine McCluskey method.  
* **Combinational Circuits** - Adder, Subtractor, Code converters (Gray to Binary & Binary to Gray).  
* **Encoders (3x8), Decoders (8x3), Multiplexers (1x8), De-multiplexers (8x1).**

### Module - 5 (Sequential Circuits)

* **Flip Flops** - SR, D, JK, T and Master-Slave flip flop.  
* **Shift Registers**.  
* **Counters** - 3-bit Synchronous and Asynchronous - Modulo 3 Counter - Ring Counter - Sequence detector.

## References

* Robert L. Boylestad and Louis Nashelsky, *Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory*, Prentice Hall, Tenth Edition, 2009.  
* Ramakant A. Gayakward, *Op-amps and Linear Integrated Circuits*, IV Edition, Pearson Education, 2002.  
* M. Morris Mano, *Digital Logic and Computer Design*, Pearson Education, 2002.  
* Allen Mottershead, *Electronic Devices and Circuits: An Introduction*, Prentice Hall of India, 2013.  
* D. Roy Choudhury, Shail B. Jain, *Linear Integrated Circuits*, Fifth Edition, New Age, 2018.  
* Thomas L. Floyd, *Digital Fundamentals*, Eleventh Edition, Pearson Education, 2011.  
* A. Anand Kumar, *Fundamentals of Digital Circuits*, Second Edition, PHI, 2009.  
