---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht478"
course_title: "fuel-cell-technology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT478: Fuel Cell Technology

## Course Objectives

- Explain the fundamentals of electrochemistry, thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat and mass transfer, components of fuel cells and fuel cell systems.
- Illustrate various types of fuel cells and compare it with conventional systems.
- Explain the significance of fuel cell technology in the new global energy scenario.
- Design and explain fuel cell stack and fuel cell systems.
- Distinguish the expectances of hydrogen as a fuel and energy vector in the context of renewable energy.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction (7 Hrs.)

Introduction: Fuel Cell, Brief History of fuel cells, Fuel Cell and conventional processes – comparison, Types of Fuel Cells Application scenarios, Advantages and disadvantages, Energy & power relations, units, Working of a PEM fuel Cell, Major Cell Components, Material Properties, Processes and Operating Conditions of PEMFC.

### Module - 2: Thermodynamics and Reaction Kinetics (7 Hrs.)

Thermodynamics: Gibb's free energy -Work potential of fuel, Reversible voltage - NERNST Equation, Voltage and P, T and concentration dependence – examples, Faraday's Laws, Efficiency: thermodynamic, voltage and fuel. Reaction Kinetics: Electrochemical reaction fundamentals, electrode kinetics, Charge transfer and activations energy, Exchange current density - slow and fast reactions, Potential and equilibrium - galvanic potential, Reaction rate and potential - Butler Volmer equation & Tafel equation, Exchange Currents and Electrocatalysis: How to Improve Kinetic Performance, Electrode design basics.

### Module - 3: Charge and Mass Transport (7 Hrs.)

Charge and Mass Transport: Charge transport resistances, voltage losses, Ionic and electronic conductivities, Ionic conduction in different FC electrolytes: Aqueous, polymeric and ceramic, Diffusive transport & voltage loss: Limiting current density, Nernstian and kinetic effect, Convective transport: flow channels, gas diffusion / porous layer, gas velocity, pressure.

### Module - 4: Stack Design and Fuel Cell Diagnostics (7 Hrs.)

Stack Design: Sizing of a Fuel Cell Stack, Stack Configuration, Uniform distribution of Reactants, Heat removal, Stack Clamping. Fuel Cell Diagnostics: Polarization Curve, Current Interrupt, AC Impedance Spectroscopy, Pressure drop as a diagnostic tool.

### Module - 5: Fuel Cell System Design and Hydrogen Economy (7 Hrs.)

Fuel Cell System Design: Hydrogen-Oxygen Systems, Hydrogen-Air Systems, Fuel Cell Systems with Fuel Processor, System Efficiency. Fuel Cells and Hydrogen Economy: Hydrogen Energy Systems, Hydrogen Energy Technologies, Transition to Hydrogen Economy.

## References

- Ryan P. O'Hayre, Suk-Won Cha, Whitney Colella & Fritz B. Printz, _Fuel Cell Fundamentals_, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Jersey, 2006
- Frano Barbir. _PEM Fuel Cells: Theory and Practice_. Elsevier, 2005
- Vielstich, W, Gasteiger, H. A. Lamm, A. (Eds):_Handbook of Fuel Cells Fundamentals, Technology and Applications_. John Wiely & Sons Ltd: NY, 2003; Vols1-4
- _Fuel Cell Handbook_, 7the Edn., EG & G Technical Services, Nov 2004
- Hordeski, M. F. _Alternative Fuels: The Future of Hydrogen_, The Fairmont Press: Lilburn, GA, 2007.
- Kordesch, K.; Simader, G. _Fuel Cells and Their Applications_. VCH: 1996
- Larminie, J.; Dicks, A. _Fuel Cell Systems Explained_. John Wiely & Sons Ltd: Chichester, 1999.
- Andreas Zuttel; Andreas Borgschulte; Louis Schdaptach, _Hydrogen as a future energy carrier_, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., KGaA, Weinheim, 2008
