---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "sw1221"
course_title: "working-with-individuals"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1221: Working with Individuals 

## Course Objectives
* To provide an understanding of the basic concepts of Social Case Work.
* To acquaint students with the process of Social Case Work.
* To develop in students the necessary attitude and skills to practice Social Case Work.

## Course Content

### Module I - Social Case Work
* Social Case Work – Concept, Meaning, Definition, Objectives
* Principles, Basic Assumptions, Contribution of Mary Richmond

### Module II - Process of Social Case Work
* **Definition & Meaning**: Rapport , Client/Service User, Case Worker, Therapeutic Interviewing, Case Study and Shadowing
* **Components** -Person, Problem, Place and Process
* **Tools** – Listening, Observation, Interview, Home Visit, Relationship
* **Case Work Process** – Intake, Study, Diagnosis, Treatment, Evaluation & Termination and Follow up
* **Case Work Relationship** – Nature, Establishment, Maintenance, Termination, Transference & Counter transference

### Module III - Case Work Practice Models
* Problem Solving Model, System Model, Ecological Model
* Strengths based Model and Resilience Model

### Module IV - Case Work Recording 
* **Recording**: Importance / Types - Verbatim, Narrative, Condensed, Analytical & Summary Records

### Module V - Skills for working with individuals
* Preparing and familiarizing with intake form
* Physical arrangements
* Creating ambience
* Verbal and non-verbal communication skills
* Working with individuals in hospitals, schools, Case study Shadowing and family

## References
1. Grace Mathew, An introduction to social case work, Tata Institutte of Social Sciences, 1992.
2. Misra P.D – Social work – Philosophy and Methods – Inter India Publications.
3. Richmond, M. (1917). Social Diagnosis.
4. Gordon Hamilton - Theory and practice and Practice of Social Casework. Colombia University Press, London, 1964.
5. Friedlander W.A.- Concepts and Methods of Social Case Work, Prentice Hall, 1964.
6. Hamilton Gordon - Principles of Social Case Recording, Colombia University Press, London, 1965.
7. Retna Parki – Case Work practices in India, TISS.