---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "sw1242"
course_title: "environmental-studies"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1242: Environmental Studies 

## Course Objectives
* To enable the students to acquire knowledge about environment.
* To enable them to contribute towards maintaining and improving the quality of the environment.

## Course Content
### Module I - Environment
* **Environmental studies**: - Meaning, Definition, Scope & Importance
* **Natural resources**: - Renewable & Non renewable resources / Forest, Water, Mineral, Food, Energy & Land Resources: - Use, Exploitation, Changes, Benefits and Conflicts
* **Role of an individual in conservation of natural resources** / equitable use of resources for sustainable life styles

### Module II - Ecosystem
* **Ecosystem**: - Concept, Structure, Functions, Producers, Consumers & Decomposers / **Energy flow / Ecological succession / Food chains, Food webs & Ecological pyramids**
* **Forest ecosystem / Green land ecosystem, Desert ecosystem / Aquatic ecosystem**

### Module III - Biodiversity
* **Bio diversity and its Conservation**: - Introduction, Definition, Threats, In-situ and Ex-situ conservation of bio diversity Eco System Diversity
* **Value of biodiversity / Social, Ethical, Aesthetic & Option values** at global, national and local levels

### Module IV - Social Issues and Environment 
* **Social issues and Environment**:- From Unsustainable to Sustainable development / **Urban problems related to energy**
* **Environmental pollution**:- Definition, Causes & Effects / **Air, Water, Soil, Marine & Noise pollution, Thermal and Nuclear hazards**:- Prevention and control measures
* **Solid waste management:- Meaning & Importance / Water conservation / Rainwater harvesting / Watershed management / Resettlement and rehabilitation of people**:- Problems, Concerns, Case studies

### Module V - Environmental Ethics
* **Environmental ethics**:- Issues & possible solutions
* **Climate change / Global warming / Acid rain / Ozone layer depletion / Nuclear accidents and holocaust**:- Meaning & Case studies / **Waste land reclamation / Consumerism & waste products**
* **Environment protection Act (Prevention & control of pollution) & Forest conservation Act** - Salient features


## References
### Books Recommended
1. Introduction to Environmental Economics – Nick Hanley etal – Oxford.
2. Ecology and Economics – Ramprasad Sengupta – Oxford.
3. Environmental Economics – an Indian perspective – Rabindra N Bhattaria – Oxford.
4. Bharucha Erach, The Biodiversity of India, Mapin Publishing Pvt Ltd, Ahmadabad.
5. Brunner RC, 1989, Hazardous Waste Incineration. McGraw Hill Inc.
6. Jadhav H & Bhosale, VM 1995. Environmental Protection and Laws. Himalaya Publishing House, New Delhi.
7. Mhaskar AK, Matter Hazardous, Techno-Science Publication (TB)
8. Miller TG, Jr. Environmental Science Wadsworth Publishing Co. (TB)
9. Survey of the Environment, The Hindu (M)