---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "information-technology"
version: "2019"
semester: "3"
course_code: "mat203"
course_title: "discrete-mathematical-structures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---
# MAT203: Discrete Mathematical Structures

## Course Objectives

- To introduce the concepts of mathematical logic and its applications.
- To introduce the concept of functions, relations, and mathematical reasoning.
- To familiarize with the basic concepts of algebraic structures and their applications.
- To understand the basic concepts of graph theory and its applications in computer science.
- To apply the concepts of discrete structures in computer science.
## Course Outcomes

- Understand and apply the fundamental principles of logic, sets, and functions.
-Apply the concepts of relations, equivalence, and partial ordering.
- Apply the principles of mathematical induction, recurrence relations, and generating functions in problem-solving.
-  Understand and apply the concepts of algebraic structures such as groups and rings.
-  Solve problems using graph theory concepts.

  ## Course Content

### Module 1: Fundamentals of Logic  
Mathematical logic – Basic connectives and truth tables, Statements, Logical connectives, Tautology, Contradiction.  
Logical Equivalence – Laws of logic, Principle of duality, Substitution rules.  
Implication – Contrapositive, Converse, Inverse.  
Logical implication – Rules of inference.  
Use of quantifiers – Open statement, Quantifiers.  
Logical equivalence and implications for quantified statements – Implications, Negation.

### Module 2: Fundamentals of Counting Theory  
Rule of Sum – Extension of sum rule.  
Rule of Product – Extension of product rule.  
Permutations, Combinations, Binomial Theorem (without proof), Combinations with repetition.  
Pigeonhole Principle.  
Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion Theorem (without proof) – Generalization of the principle.  
Derangements.

### Module 3: Relations and Functions  
Cartesian Product, Binary Relations.  
Functions – Domain, Range, One-to-one functions, Image restrictions.  
Properties of relations – Reachability, Reflexive, Symmetric, Transitive, Anti-symmetric, Irreflexive, Partial order, Equivalence.  
Partially Ordered Set – Hasse diagram, Maximal/Minimal elements, Least upper bound (LUB), Greatest lower bound (GLB).  
Equivalence relations and partitions – Equivalence class.  
Lattice – Dual lattice, Sublattice, Properties of GLB and LUB, Special lattice, Complete lattice, Bounded lattice, Distributive lattice.  
(*Topological sorting algorithm excluded*)

### Module 4: Generating Functions and Recurrence Relations  
Generating functions – Definition, Examples, Calculation techniques, Exponential generating functions.  
First-order linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients – Homogeneous and non-homogeneous solutions.  
Second-order linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients – Homogeneous and non-homogeneous solutions.

### Module 5: Algebraic Structures  
Algebraic systems – Properties, Homomorphism and Isomorphism.  
Semigroups and Monoids – Cyclic monoids, Subsemigroups and submonoids, Homomorphism and Isomorphism of semigroups and monoids.  
Groups – Elementary properties, Subgroups, Symmetric group on three symbols, Direct product of two groups, Group homomorphism, Isomorphism of groups, Cyclic groups.  
Right and left cosets, Lagrange’s Theorem.

## References

1. Ralph P. Grimaldi, B. V. Ramana, *Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics (An Applied Introduction)*, 5th Edition, Pearson.
2. Kenneth H. Rosen, *Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications with Combinatorics and Graph Theory*, 7th Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2011.
3. Tremblay, J. P., & Manohar, R., *Discrete Mathematical Structures with Applications to Computer Science*, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2003.
4. Bernard Kolman, Robert C. Busby, Sharan Cutler Ross, *Discrete Mathematical Structures*, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2003.
5. Kenneth H. Rosen, *Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications*, 5th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, 2003.
6. Richard Johnsonbaugh, *Discrete Mathematics*, 5th Edition, Pearson Education Asia, New Delhi, 2002.
7. Joe L. Mott, Abraham Kandel, Theodore P. Baker, *Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists and Mathematicians*, 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall India, 2009.
