---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cst448"
course_title: "internet-of-things"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST448: Internet of Things  

## Course Objectives  
* Outline the fundamentals of IoT and its physical/logical architecture.  
* Explain the hardware and network architectures for IoT.  
* Perform data analytics on IoT platforms.  
* Understand security considerations in IoT.  
* Implement IoT applications using available hardware/software.  

## Modules  

### Module 1 – IoT Architecture  
* What is IoT, Genesis of IoT, IoT and Digitization, IoT Impact.  
* Convergence of IT and IoT, IoT Challenges.  
* IoT Network Architecture and Design.  
* Drivers Behind New Network Architectures, Comparing IoT Architectures.  
* A Simplified IoT Architecture, Core IoT Functional Stack.  
* IoT Data Management and Compute Stack.  

### Module 2 – Engineering IoT Networks  
* Smart Objects – Sensors, Actuators, Smart Objects.  
* Sensor Networks and connecting Smart Objects.  
* Communications Criteria, IoT Access Technologies.  

### Module 3 – IoT Network Layer  
* IP as the IoT Network Layer, Business Case for IP.  
* Optimization of IP for IoT.  
* Profiles and Compliances, Application Protocols for IoT.  
* Transport Layer, IoT Application Transport Methods.  

### Module 4 – Data Analytics for IoT  
* Data and Analytics for IoT, Introduction to Data Analytics for IoT.  
* Machine Learning, Big Data Analytics Tools and Technology.  
* Edge Streaming Analytics, Network Analytics.  
* Securing IoT – OT Security history, challenges, differences between IT/OT security.  
* Risk Analysis Structures – OCTAVE and FAIR.  

### Module 5 – Developing IoT Systems  
* IoT Logical Design using Python.  
* IoT Physical Devices – Raspberry Pi interfaces, Programming Pi with Python.  
* Other IoT devices and Cloud offerings.  
* Cloud Storage Models, WAMP – Autobahn for IoT, Django.  
* Designing RESTful Web APIs, Cloud Web Services for IoT.  

## References  
* David Hanes, Gonzalo Salgueiro, Patrick Grossetete, Robert Barton, Jerome Henry – *IoT Fundamentals: Networking Technologies, Protocols, and Use Cases for the Internet of Things*, Pearson Education, 1st Edition.  
* Arshadeep Bahga, Vijay Madisetti – *Internet of Things: A Hands-On Approach*, University Press, 2015.  
* Rajkamal – *Internet of Things: Architecture and Design Principles*, McGraw Hill.  
* Dieter Uckelmann, Mark Harrison, Michahelles Florian – *Architecting the Internet of Things*, Springer, 2011.  
* Dr. Ovidiu Vermesan, Dr. Peter Friess – *Internet of Things: Converging Technologies for Smart Environments and Integrated Ecosystems*, River Publishers, 2013.  
* Simon Monk – *Programming Arduino: Getting Started with Sketches*, McGraw Hill Publications.  
