---
country: "India"
university: "KTU"
branch: "CSE"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "CST402"
course_title: "Distributed Computing"
language: "English"
contributor: "@arjun-ms"
---

# CST402: Distributed Computing


## Course Objectives
* Summarize various aspects of distributed computation model and logical time. 
* Illustrate election algorithm, global snapshot algorithm and termination detection algorithm. 
* Compare token based, non-token based and quorum based mutual exclusion algorithms. 
* Recognize the significance of deadlock detection and shared memory in distributed systems. 
* Explain the concepts of failure recovery and consensus. 
* Illustrate distributed file system architectures. 

## Course Content
### Module - 1 (Distributed systems basics and Computation model)
* Distributed System – Definition, Relation to computer system components, Motivation, Primitives for distributed communication, Design issues, Challenges and applications. 
* A model of distributed computations - Distributed program, Model of distributed executions, Models of communication networks, Global state of a distributed system, Cuts of a distributed computation, Past and future cones of an event, Models of process communications. 

### Module - 2 (Election algorithm, Global state and Termination detection)
* Logical time - A framework for a system of logical clocks, Scalar time, Vector time. 
* Leader election algorithm - Bully algorithm, Ring algorithm. 
* Global state and snapshot recording algorithms System model and definitions, Snapshot algorithm for FIFO channels – Chandy Lamport algorithm. 
* Termination detection System model of a distributed computation, Termination detection using distributed snapshots, Termination detection by weight throwing, Spanning-tree-based algorithm. 

### Module - 3 (Mutual exclusion and Deadlock detection)
* Distributed mutual exclusion algorithms System model, Requirements of mutual exclusion algorithm. 
* Lamport's algorithm, Ricart-Agrawala algorithm, Quorum-based mutual exclusion algorithms - Maekawa's algorithm. 
* Token-based algorithm – Suzuki-Kasami's broadcast algorithm. 
* Deadlock detection in distributed systems – System model, Deadlock handling strategies, Issues in deadlock detection, Models of deadlocks. 

### Module - 4 (Distributed shared memory and Failure recovery)
* Distributed shared memory Abstraction and advantages. 
* Shared memory mutual exclusion Lamport's bakery algorithm. 
* Check pointing and rollback recovery – System model, consistent and inconsistent states, different types of messages, Issues in failure recovery, checkpoint based recovery, log based roll back recovery. 

### Module - 5 (Consensus and Distributed file system)
* Consensus and agreement algorithms - Assumptions, The Byzantine agreement and other problems, Agreement in (message-passing) synchronous systems with failures - Consensus algorithm for crash failures. 
* Distributed file system - File service architecture, Case studies: Sun Network File System, Andrew File System, Google File System. 

## References
* Ajay D. Kshemkalyani and Mukesh Singhal, Distributed Computing: Principles, Algorithms, and Systems, Cambridge University Press, 2011. 
* George Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, Tim Kindberg and Gordon Blair. Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design, Addison Wesley, Fifth edition. 
* Kai Hwang, Geoffrey C Fox, Jack J Dongarra, Distributed and Cloud Computing – From Parallel Processing to the Internet of Things, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2012. 
* Sukumar Ghosh, Distributed Systems: An Algorithmic Approach, CRC Press, Second edition, 2015. 
* Maarten Van Steen, Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Distributed Systems, Prentice Hall of India, Third edition, 2017. 
* Randy Chow and Theodore Johnson, Distributed Operating Systems and Algorithm Analysis, Pearson Education India, First edition, 2009. 
* Valmir C. Barbosa, An Introduction to Distributed Algorithms, MIT Press, 2003. 

