---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechatronics"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "mrt478"
course_title: "artificial-intelligence"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# MRT478: Artificial Intelligence

## Course Objectives

- Develop semantic-based and context-aware systems to acquire, organize, process, share and use knowledge.
- Understand the fundamental concepts of Artificial Intelligence.
- Interpret and apply different algorithms used in AI.
- Solve basic AI problems and apply AI techniques to develop intelligent real-world systems.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Introduction to AI)

- AI problems, foundation and history of AI.
- **Intelligent agents**: Agents and Environments, the concept of rationality, the nature of environments, structure of agents.
- Problem-solving agents and problem formulation.

### Module - 2 (Searching and Game Playing)

- **Searching**: Searching for solutions, uniformed search strategies (Breadth-first search, Depth-first Search).
- **Heuristic Search**: Hill climbing, A\* and AO\* Algorithms, Problem reduction.
- **Game Playing**: Adversarial search, Games, mini-max algorithm, optimal decisions in multiplayer games, Alpha-Beta pruning, and evaluation functions.

### Module - 3 (Knowledge Representation and Reasoning)

- Knowledge representation issues, predicate logic, logic programming.
- Semantic nets, frames and inheritance, constraint propagation.
- Representing knowledge using rules, rule-based deduction systems.
- **Reasoning under uncertainty**: Review of probability, Baye’s probabilistic interferences and Dempster-Shafer theory.

### Module - 4 (Logic and Learning)

- **First-Order Logic**: Inference, propositional vs. first-order inference, unification & lifting, forward chaining, backward chaining, Resolution.
- **Learning from Observation**: Inductive learning, Decision trees, Explanation-based learning.
- Statistical Learning methods and Reinforcement Learning.

### Module - 5 (Expert Systems and Advanced Topics)

- **Expert Systems**: Introduction, basic concepts, structure, how expert systems work, problem areas, success factors, and types.
- **Knowledge Engineering**: Scope of knowledge, difficulties in knowledge acquisition, methods of acquisition.
- Machine learning, intelligent agents, and societal impacts.
- **Reasoning in AI**: Inference with rules and frames, model-based reasoning, case-based reasoning, and inference with uncertainty.

## References

- S. Russel and P. Norvig — *Artificial Intelligence – A Modern Approach*, Second Edition, Pearson Education
- David Poole, Alan Mackworth, Randy Goebel — *Computational Intelligence : a logical approach*, Oxford University Press.
- G. Luger — *Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for complex problem solving*, Fourth Edition, Pearson Education.
- J. Nilsson — *Artificial Intelligence: A new Synthesis*, Elsevier Publishers
