---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 7
course_code: "oeaot724"
course_title: "advanced-non-destructive-testing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# OEAOT724 - Advanced Non-Destructive Testing

## Course Objectives

-   To comprehend the fundamental ideas, methodologies, tools, applications, and constraints of advanced **Non-Destructive Testing (NDT)** approaches.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Acoustic Emission Inspection

-   Principles and theory of **Acoustic Emission (AE)**, including signal propagation and parameters.
-   The AE measurement chain, location calculation, and applications in inspecting pressure vessels, welds, and composites.

### Module 2: Leak Testing

-   Introduction to **leak testing**, including objectives, terminologies, and types of leaks.
-   Methods for leak testing with and without tracer gases, such as **Halogen diode** and **Helium mass spectrometer** leak testing.

### Module 3: Digital Radiography

-   Principles of **Digital Radiography (DR)**.
-   Methods including digitization of X-ray films, **Computed Radiography (CR)**, and Direct Radiography (DR).
-   Comparison of film, CR, and DR methods.

### Module 4: Computed Tomography (CT)

-   Principles of **Computed Tomography (CT)** and CT image reconstruction algorithms.
-   **CT system design**, scanning geometries, data acquisition, and image quality.
-   Industrial applications of CT and comparison to other NDT methods.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Nondestructive evaluation of materials by infrared thermography* – X. P. V. Maldague, Springer-Verlag, 1993
-   *Emerging Technologies in Non-Destructive Testing* – A.S. Paipetis, T. E Matikas and D. G. Aggelis, CRC Press, 2012
-   *Acoustic Emission Testing* – C. U. Grosse, Springer, 2008
-   *Non-Destructive Testing Handbook; Infrared and Thermal Testing, Vol-3* – X. P.V. Maldague, ASNT, 3rd edition, 2001
-   *Non-Destructive Testing Handbook; Leak Testing, Vol-1* – C. N. Jackson and N. Sherlock, ASNT, 3rd edition, 1998
-   *Non-Destructive Testing Handbook; Acoustic Emission Testing, Vol-6* – R. K. Miller and V.K. Hill, ASNT, 3rd edition, 2005

---
