---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "cst312"
course_title: "foundations-of-machine-learning"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST312: Foundations of Machine Learning

## Course Objectives
* Illustrate operations and applications of linear equations, matrix algebra, vector spaces, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
* Illustrate the concepts of orthogonality and diagonalization.
* Solve computational problems using probability and random variables.
* Identify an appropriate probability distribution for a given discrete or continuous random variable and use its properties.
* Illustrate moment generating function, law of large numbers and central limit theorems.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Linear Algebra)
* Systems of Linear Equations – Matrices, Solving Systems of Linear Equations.
* Vector Spaces - Linear Independence, Basis and Rank, Linear Mappings.

### Module - 2 (Linear Algebra)
* Norms - Inner Products, Lengths and Distances, Angles and Orthogonality.
* Orthonormal Basis, Orthogonal Complement, Orthogonal Projections.
* Matrix Decompositions - Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors, Eigen decomposition and Diagonalization.

### Module - 3 (Probability and Distributions)
* Probability Space - Sample Spaces, Probability Measures, Computing Probabilities, Conditional Probability, Baye’s Rule, Independence.
* Random Variables - Discrete Random Variables (Bernoulli Random Variables, Binomial Distribution, Geometric and Poisson Distribution).
* Continuous Random Variables (Exponential Density, Gamma Density, Normal Distribution, Beta Density).

### Module - 4 (Random Variables)
* Functions of a Random Variable.
* Joint Distributions - Independent Random Variables, Conditional Distributions, Functions of Jointly Distributed Random Variables.
* Expected Values - Expected Value of a Random Variable, Expectations of Functions of Random Variables, Expectations of Linear Combinations of Random Variables, Variance and Standard Deviation, Covariance and Correlation, Conditional Expectation.

### Module - 5 (Limit Theorems)
* Moment-Generating Function.
* Limit Theorems (proof not expected) - Law of Large Numbers, Convergence in Distribution and the Central Limit Theorem.
* Distributions derived from the Normal Distribution - Chi-square, t, and F Distributions, Sample Mean and the Sample Variance.

## References
* Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, Cheng Soon Ong, *Mathematics for Machine Learning*, Cambridge University Press.  
* John A. Rice, *Mathematical Statistics and Data Analysis*, 3rd Edition, Cengage.  
* Gilbert Strang, *Linear Algebra and Its Applications*, 4th Edition.  
* Sheldon Axler, *Linear Algebra Done Right*, Springer, 2015.  
* Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe, *Introduction to Applied Linear Algebra*, Cambridge University Press, 2018.
