---
country: "india"
university: "mahatma-gandhi-university"
branch: "computer-applications-honours"
version: "2024"
semester: "1"
course_code: "mg1dscbca101"
course_title: "digital-fundamentals"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Amendamaria"
---
# MG1DSCBCA101 - Digital Fundamentals

This course covers the fundamentals of digital electronics, including number systems, Boolean algebra, logic gates, combinational logic circuits, and sequential logic circuits. Students gain a comprehensive understanding of digital logic design principles and their applications through theoretical concepts and practical examples.

---
## Course Objectives

* Demonstrate comprehension of number systems.
* Analyse the working of logic gates and solve expressions using laws of Boolean algebra.
* Illustrate combinational logic circuits using multiplexers, demultiplexers, and other circuits.
* Design sequential circuits using flip-flops and registers.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Number Systems
* *Core Concepts:* Base or radix, Non-positional and Positional number systems (Decimal, Binary, Octal, Hexadecimal).
* *Conversions & Arithmetic:* Conversion from one number system to another, binary addition and subtraction, 1's Complement, and 2's complement.
* *Codes:* BCD numbers and 8421 addition.

### Module 2: Boolean Algebra and Logic Gates
* *Logic Gates:* AND, OR, NOT, NAND, NOR, XOR, and XNOR gates with truth tables.
* *Boolean Algebra:* Basic laws, simplification of expressions, and DeMorgan's theorems.
* *Expressions:* Dual expressions, Canonical expressions (Minterms, Maxterms), SOP, and POS expressions.
* *Simplification:* Using K-MAP (up to 4 variables) and representation using NAND/NOR Gates.

### Module 3: Combinational Logic Circuits
* *Adders:* Half adder and Full adder.
* *Core Circuits:* Encoders and Decoders (Diagram and working principle).
* *Data Selectors:* Multiplexers and Demultiplexers (Diagram and working principle).

### Module 4: Sequential Logic Circuits
* *Flip-Flops:* RS, JK, T, D, and triggering of flip-flops.
* *Registers:* Concept of Registers.

---
## References
* **Core References:**
    * M Morris Mano. Digital Logic and Computer Design (4th Edition). Prentice Hall.
    * A. Anand Kumar (2018). Fundamentals of Digital Circuits (4th Edition). PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
* **Suggested Readings:**
    * Thomas C Bartee- Digital computer Fundamentals, Sixth Edition, TATA McGraw Hill Edition
    * Thomas L Floyd- Digital Fundamentals, Ninth edition, PEARSON Prentice Hall.
    * Malvino & Leach- Digital Principles and Applications, Sixth Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006