---
country: "india"
university: "mahatma-gandhi-university"
branch: "computer-applications-honours"
version: "2024"
semester: "1"
course_code: "mg1mdcbca100"
course_title: "cyber-laws-and-security"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Amendamaria"
---
# MG1MDCBCA100 - Cyber Laws and Security

This comprehensive course on Cyber Laws and Security is designed to provide participants with a thorough understanding of cyber laws, including the IT Act, data protection, and regulations related to cybercrimes, cyberbullying, and harassment, along with internet security practices. It also provides a foundational understanding of cryptography, cyber forensics, and ethical hacking principles to enhance knowledge in securing digital information and systems.

---
## Course Objectives

* Describe cyber laws, the IT Act, data protection, and various cybercrimes.
* Analyze and apply security measures during online transactions and financial activities.
* Illustrate basic cryptographic techniques and the importance of cyber forensics.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Cyber Laws, IT Act and Cyber Crimes
* *Cyber Laws:* Definition, Scope, and Key legal concepts.
* *IT Act:* Overview of the IT Act 2000, offenses, and penalties.
* *Data Protection:* Principles of Data Protection and privacy laws.
* *Cyber Crimes:* Types of cybercrimes, Hacking, Identity theft, and cyber fraud.
* *Cyber Bullying and Harassment:* Definition, forms, legal perspectives, and prevention.

### Module 2: Online Security
* *Internet Security:* Overview and Importance of Online Safety.
* *Authentication:* Importance of Strong Passwords and Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA).
* *Secure Browse:* Recognizing phishing attacks and identifying secure websites (HTTPS).
* *Social Media Security:* Privacy settings and secure information sharing.
* *Financial Security:* Secure online shopping, banking, and payment card safety.

### Module 3: Introduction to Cryptography and Cyber Forensics
* *Security Concepts:* The need for security, principles, and types of security attacks.
* *Cryptography:* Plain text, cipher text, substitution and transposition techniques, symmetric and asymmetric key cryptography.
* *Cyber Forensics:* Definition, importance, and its role in investigating cybercrime.
* *Ethical Hacking:* Introduction to Ethical Hacking.

---
## References
* **Core References:**
    * Vakul Sharma, "Information Technology Law and Practice", 3rd ed. 2011, Universal Law Pub., New Delhi.
    * Adv. Prashant Mali, "Cyber Law & Cyber Crimes", Snow White Publications Pvt. Ltd, 2nd ed. 2015.
    * Michael Cross, "Social Media Security: Leveraging Social Networking While Mitigating Risk", Elsevier, 2014.
    * William Stallings & Lawrie Brown " Computer Security - Principles and Practice" 3rd ed., Pearson Pub., 2017.
    * William Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security Principles and Practice, 4/e, Pearson Ed.
    * Cyber Forensics - Concepts and Approaches, Ravi Kumar & B Jain,2006, icfai university press
* **Suggested Readings:**
    * "Cyber Law in India" by Pavan Duggal
    * "Cyber Security: A Practitioner's Guide" by Eric Cole
    * "Principles of Intellectual Property" by Stephen M McJohn
    * "The Indian Cyber Law" by Sandeep Agrawal