---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 5
course_code: "sw1541"
course_title: "rural-community-development"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1541: Rural Community Development 

## Course Objectives
* To understand the concepts and strategies of rural community development.
* To enable the students to frame a historical perspective of community development.
* To understand various rural development programmes.
* To prepare the social workers to work in Developmental settings like local self governments, co-operatives, ICDS scheme and in NRHM.

## Course Content
### Module I - Introduction to Rural Communities
* Rural community – meaning and characteristics
* Historic development of rural community: Origin of villages –pre independence
* Including Village Council and Village Life
* Rural Settlement: Characteristics of Rural Society and Rural Life
* Patterns of Rural Settlements: farmsteads, hamlets, line and round villages

### Module II - Rural Life and Rural Reconstruction
* Rural reconstruction: concept, meaning, and philosophy
* Model pilot projects : Marthandam Project, Sevagram Centre
* Sri nikethan, Firka Development Scheme, Sarvodaya Centres
* Nilokheri Project, Etawah Project and Gurgaon Experiment 

### Module III - Rural Development
* Rural Community Development - meaning, objectives, philosophy, principles, Approaches and strategies
* Community Development Programme of 1952 and National Extension Services – Objectives, Activities, Characteristics
* Centre and state level -Organizational and Administrative Structure

### Module IV - Panchayati Raj and Rural Development
* Panchyati Raj: concepts, history and 73rd Constitutional Amendment
* Kerala Panchayati Raj Act 1994- salient features
* LSGs, Three Tier Panchayats at Village, Block, and District level, Powers and Duties of Panchayats-
* Peoples planning in Kerala -Role of Grama Sabha

### Module V - Programmes for Rural Development
* Central government programmes: Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Grantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
* National Rural Livelihood Mission for Rural Development
* PMAY, Providing Urban Amenities in Rural Areas (PURA)
* State Development programmes: Kudumbashree, Suchithwa Mission

## References
1. Madan G.R.(1964) *Changing Pattern of Indian Villages*. Delhi: S. Chand and Co.
2. Mishra, S.N., Shweta Mishra & Chaitali Pal (2000). *Decentralised Planning and Panchayati Raj*. New Delhi: Mittal Publications, 2000.
3. Maheshwari, Shriram (1985) *Rural Development in India A Public Policy Approach*. New Delhi: Sage Publications.
4. Mohanan, B. (2005) *Decentralised Governance and Participatory Development Issues, Constraints, and Prospects*. New Delhi: Concept Publishing Company.
5. Chitambar, J.B. (1990) *Introductory Rural Sociology*. New Delhi: Wiley Eastern Ltd.
6. Doshi, S.L. and P.C. Jain. (1999) *Rural Sociology*. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
7. Sinha, H.K.(Ed.). Challenges in Rural Development. New Delhi: Discovery Publishing House, 1998.
8. Singh, Hoshiar (1995). *Administration of Rural Development in India*. New Delhi:
Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd.
9. Kalam, Abdul A.P.J. and Srijan Pal Singh (2011) *Target 3 Billion PURA: Innovative Solutions towards Sustainable Development*. New Delhi: Penguin Books.