---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 4
course_code: "magap04c14"
course_title: "issues-in-international-politics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP04C14: Issues in International Politics

## Course Objectives
1. To introduce students to the evolution and meaning of Global Governance, examining how traditional concepts of International Politics have expanded to include new dimensions such as global civil society, international law, and public policy.
2. To provide students with theoretical frameworks to critically analyze global governance, focusing on the major debates in International Politics such as Liberalism, Realism, Marxism, and Critical Theory.
3. To enable students to engage critically with key global actors (e.g., UN, WB, IMF, WTO), understanding their changing roles within the context of global governance.
4. To equip students with the tools to analyze contemporary global issues, including security, humanitarian intervention, peacekeeping, and global risks (e.g., nuclear nonproliferation, climate security), through the lens of global governance literature.

## Course Outcomes
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the evolution of Global Governance, identifying how it has transformed traditional concepts in International Politics, such as diplomacy, international political economy, and international law.
2. Critically engage with key theoretical debates in global governance, including Liberalism, Realism, Marxism, and Critical Theory, and apply these frameworks to contemporary global issues.
3. Analyze the roles and influence of global actors, including international organizations like the UN, IMF, World Bank, and WTO, in shaping the global governance agenda and their changing functions in addressing global challenges.
4. Evaluate global challenges and risks such as security, humanitarian intervention, climate security, and global health, and discuss them in terms of governance structures, policies, and practices designed to address these issues.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 International Politics and Global Governance: Changing frameworks and perspectives
1. Global Governance: Meaning, and Evolution, and the conceptual transition from International Politics and Global Governance.
2. Governance Agenda in Traditional Concepts of International RelationsDiplomacy, International Political Economy, International Law, New Public Sphere, Global Civil Society and Public Policy.

### Module - 2 Theorizing Global Governance
1. Approaching Global Governance: Different Views- 
    1. Liberalism 
    2. Realism 
    3. Constructivism 
    4. Marxist 
    5. Critical Theory
2. Theoretical Understanding of Global Governance: 
    1. Global Governance and Our Future 
    2. Elements of the Theory Global Governance, and Critical Perspectives on Crisis of Global Governance

### Module - 3 Institutions and Actors
1. UN System. Reforming the UN through global governance perspective- 
    1. Security Council
    2. Peace Operations 
    3. Development
    4. Human Rights
2. W T O. Reframing WTO through global governance agenda, & I M F & World Bank. -Reframing I M F and World Bank through global governance agenda.

### Module - 4 Conceptualizing Peace and Security in Global Governance Agenda
1. Global Governance and Changing Perspectives about Security: 
    1. Changing perspectives about Security 
    2. Security as a human agenda 
    3. Global Governance, Human Security and Cosmopolitan World
2. Securing the World, Governing Humanity: Humanitarian Intervention, Idea of Responsibility to Protect, and Peace Building & Peace Keeping operations, Postconflict Peace building

## Reading List
1. Lawrence S. Finkelstein. *What Is Global Governance? Global Governance*, Sept.–Dec. 1995, Vol. 1, No. 3 (Sept.–Dec. 1995), pp. 367-372. Published by: Brill.
2. Jim Whitman. Global governance: of, by and for whom? In Jim Whitman. *The Fundamentals of Global Governance*. London. Palgrave Macmillan. 2009.
3. Thomas G. Weiss. Why did global governance emerge? (Chapter 1) and what is global governance (Chapter 2). In Global Governance: Why? What? Whither? London: Polity. 2013.
4. Craig N. Murphy. The Emergence of Global Governance. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
5. Hannes Hansen-Magnusson. Introducing Politics among People. (Chapter-1). In Hannes HansenMagnusson. International Relations as Politics among People: Hermeneutic Encounters and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2019.
6. Michael Zürn. A New Paradigm in International relations. (Chapter 10). In Michael Zürn. A Theory of Global Governance: Authority, Legitimacy, and Contestation. London: OUP. 2018.
7. Tanja Bru ̈ hl and Volker Rittberger. From international to global governance: Actors, collective decision-making, and the United Nations in the world of the twenty- first century. 2002 https://archive.unu.edu/unupress/sample-chapters/GlobalGov.pdf
8. Manuel Castells. Global Governance and Global Politics. PS: Political Science and Politics, Jan., 2005, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Jan., 2005), pp. 9-16. American Political Science Association.
9. Jean Grugel and Nicola Piper. Critical Perspectives on Global Governance: Rights and regulation in governing regimes. London: Routledge. 2007. (Chapter 1- Global governance and rights).
10. Jean-Robert Leguey-Feilleux. Global Governance Diplomacy. London: Rpwan and Little Field. 2017. (Chapter 2. The Role of State Diplomacy in Global Governance)
11. Robert O’Brien. Global civil society and global governance. in Alice D. Ba and Matthew J. Hoffmann. Contending Perspectives on Global Governance Coherence, contestation and world order. Routledge. 2005.
12. Manuel Castells. The New Public Sphere: Global Civil Society, Communication Networks, and Global Governance. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , Mar., 2008, Vol. 616, Public Diplomacy in a Changing World (Mar., 2008), pp. 78-93.
13. Daniel Green. Liberal imperialism as global-governance perspective. In Alice D. Ba and Matthew J. Hoffmann. Contending Perspectives on Global Governance Coherence, contestation and world order. London: Routledge. 2005.
14. Jennifer Sterling-Folker.(2015). Realist global governance: revisiting *cave! hic dragones* and beyond. in Alice D. Ba and Matthew J. Hoffmann. Contending Perspectives on Global Governance Coherence, contestation and world order. London: New York.
15. Wendt, A. (1992, Spring). Anarchy is what states make of it: The social construction of power politics. *International Organization, 46*(2), 391-425. doi:10.1017/s0020818300027764
16. Paul Cammack. Marxism. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
17. Robert W. Cox. Critical Theory. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
18. James Rosenau. Governance in a New Global Order. In Held, David and McGrew, Anthony, (eds.) Governing Globalization: Power, Authority and Global Governance. Polity Press, Cambridge, UK, 2003
19. David Held. Elements of a Theory of Global Governance. ISSN 2283-7949. Glocalism: Journal Of Culture, Politics And Innovation. 2017. https://glocalismjournal.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/held_gjcpi_2017_2.pdf
20. Rorden Wilkinson: Global Governance: A preliminary Interrogation. In Rorden Wilkinson & Steve Hughes ed., Global Governance: Critical Perspectives. London: Routledge. 2012.
21. Stephen Gill, Reimagining the Future: Some Critical Reflections. In Stephen Gill ed. Critical Perspectives on the Crisis of Global Governance: Reimagining the Future. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 2015.
22. James W. Davis. A Critical View of Global Governance. Swiss Political Science Review 18(2): 272–286. 2012. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1662-6370.2012.02069.x
23. Leon Gordenker. The UN System in Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
24. Rita Parker and Anthony Burke. The United Nations and Global Security. In Anthony Burke and Rita Parker. Global Insecurity: Futures of Global Chaos and Governance. London: Palgrave MacMillan. 2017.
25. Bernard Hoekman. Global Trade Governance. in Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
26. Richard Peet . Unholy Trinity the IMF, World Bank and WTO. London: Zed Books. 2009. (Chapter 5).
27. Bessma Momani. Global Financial Governance. in Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
28. James Raymond Vreeland. The International Monetary Fund: Politics of conditional lending. London: Routledge. 2007. Chapter 1&2.
29. Richard Peet . Unholy Trinity the IMF, World Bank and WTO. London: Zed Books. 2009. (Chapter 4).
30. Ngaire Woods, The Globalizers: The IMF, World Banks and Their Borrowers. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2006. Chapter 1, 2 & 7.
31. Fen Osler Hampson and Mark Raymond. Human Security as a Global Public Good. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
32. Joseph Camilleri. Insecurity and Governance in an Age of Transition. In Anthony Burke and Rita Parker. Global Insecurity: Futures of Global Chaos and Governance. London: Palgrave MacMillan. 2017.
33. Erika Cudworth and Stephen Hobden. Post-human Security. In Anthony Burke and Rita Parker. Global Insecurity: Futures of Global Chaos and Governance. London: Palgrave MacMillan. 2017.
34. Anthony Burke. Security Cosmopolitanism and Global Governance. In Anthony Burke and Rita Parker. Global Insecurity: Futures of Global Chaos and Governance. London: Palgrave MacMillan. 2017.
35. Simon Chesterman. Humanitarian Intervention and R2P. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
36. Fabrice Weissman. Crisis and Humanitarian Containment. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
37. Paul D. Williams and Alex J. Bellamy. UN Security Council and Peace Operations. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.
38. Rob Jenkins. Post-conflict Peace building. In Thomas G. Weiss and Rorden Wilkinson. International Organization and Global Governance. London: Routledge. 2014.