---
country: "india"
university: "national-institute-of-technology-calicut"
branch: "industrial-power-and-automation"
version: "2023"
semester: 1
course_code: "ee6401e"
course_title: "industrial-internet-of-things"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# EE6401E: Industrial Internet of Things

## Course Outcomes
* CO 1: Analyze the key elements of an IoT ecosystem and the drivers behind the adoption of IIoT systems in various industries.
* CO 2: Analyze the implementation systems for IIoT, including microcontrollers, wireless sensor nodes, communication protocols, and networking equipment.
* CO 3: Design and use sensors with IIoT systems and utilize technologies such as XBee, Arduino, and Raspberry Pi for data acquisition and automation.
* CO 4: Apply the significance of IoE in smart grids and its application in energy generation, transmission, distribution, and revenue models, as well as the role of IoT-enabled smart meters.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Introduction to Industrial IoT (IIoT) System
* Elements of an IoT ecosystem
  - Technology drivers
  - Business drivers
* Typical IoT applications
  - Trends and implications
* Overview of IoT supported Hardware platforms
* M2M - Machine to Machine, Web of Things (WoT)
* Internet and Web Layering Business aspects of the Internet of Things
* Representational State Transfer (REST)
* Role of Internet of Things (IoT) and Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) in Industry, Industry 4.0 revolutions
* Major challenges of IoT

### Module 2: Implementation systems for IIoT
* Microcontrollers and Embedded PC roles in IIoT, Wireless Sensor nodes with Bluetooth, WiFi, and LoRa Protocols and IoT Hub systems.
* Communication Protocols
  - IEEE 802.15.4
  - ZigBee
  - Z Wave
  - Bluetooth
  - NFC
  - RFID
  - Industry standards communication technology (LoRAWAN, OPC UA, MQTT)
* Overview and working principle of Wired and wireless Networking equipment
  - Router
  - Switches
  - Access Points
* Future networking communication
* Real time case studies of IoT

### Module 3: Sensors and Interfacing with IIoT
* Sensors and Actuators for Industrial Processes
* Sensor networks
* Process automation and Data Acquisitions on IoT Platform
* Network Fundamentals
  - Anatomy of a Sensor Network
  - Examples of Sensor Networks
  - Topology of a Sensor Network Communication Media
* Types of Sensor Nodes, Storing Sensor Data
* XBee Primer, Building an XBee-ZB Mesh Network, Arduino-Based Sensor Nodes
* Hosting Sensors with Raspberry Pi.
* Enterprise data for IIoT, emerging descriptive data standards for IIoT, Cloud data base, Cloud computing 
* Configuring Arduino/Raspberry pi board for the IoT

### Module 4: Internet on Energy (IoE)
* Need for Internet on Energy (IoE)
  - Generalized approach of IoT into smart grid
* Application of IoE in generation, transmission and distribution side
* Home area network
* Role of IoT in energy storage system and smart grid technology
* Benefits and outcome of IoE in smart grid
  - IoT enabled smart meters and various electricity market price fixation
* Electricity revenue model based IoT system

## References
1. M. Kranz, "Building the Internet of Things: Implement New Business Models, Disrupt Competitors, Transform Your Industry", Wiley, 2017.
2. S. Bhattacharjee and S. Kak, "Practical Industrial Internet of Things Security: A Practitioner's Guide to Securing Connected Industries", Apress, 2020.
3. P. Lea, "Internet of Things for Architects: Architecting IoT solutions by implementing sensors, communication infrastructure, edge computing, analytics, and security", Packt Publishing, 2018.
4. K. Schwab, "The Fourth Industrial Revolution", Crown Business, 2016.
5. B. Sinclair, "IoT Inc.: How Your Company Can Use the Internet of Things to Win in the Outcome Economy", International Society of Automation (ISA), 2017.
6. J. Biron and J. Follett, "Foundational Elements of an IoT Solution", O'Reilly Media, 2016.
7. Keysight Technologies, "The Internet of Things: Enabling Technologies and Solutions for Design and Test, Application Note", 2016.
8. O. Vermesan and P. Friess, "Internet of Things: Converging Technologies for Smart Environments and Integrated Ecosystems", River Publishers. 2016