---
country: "india"
university: "national-institute-of-technology-calicut"
branch: "industrial-power-and-automation"
version: "2023"
semester: 1
course_code: "ee6402e"
course_title: "industrial-energy-conservation-and-management"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# EE6402E: Industrial Energy Conservation and Management

## Course Outcomes
* CO 1: Analyze the role of energy managers and use the skills and techniques required to implement energy management.
* CO 2: Design and quantify the energy intensive business activities in industries and organizations.
* CO 3: Apply the standard methodologies for energy audit in the workplace and energy audit Instruments.
* CO 4: Analyze energy efficient control scheme for electric motors and perform case study on load matching and selection of motors in industries.
* CO 5: Design the energy conservation methods in motors, pumps, fans, compressors, transformers, geysers, lighting schemes, air conditioning, refrigeration, cool storage.

## Course Content

### Module 1: Energy Efficiency and Auditing
* Energy scenario
  - Supply and demand
  - Energy intensive industries
  - Industrial use of energy
* System approach and End use approach to efficient use of Electricity
* Electricity tariff types
* Energy auditing
  - Types and objectives
  - Audit instruments
  - ECO assessment and Economic methods-specific energy analysis
  - Minimum energy paths-energy flow diagrams
* Consumption models
  - Case study

### Module 2: Electric Motors and Controls
* Electric motors
  - Motor Efficiency and Load Analysis
  - Starting and Controls
* Energy efficient Motors
  - Case study
* Load Matching and selection of motors
* Intelligent Motor controls
  - Variable speed drives
  - Pumps and Fans
  - Efficient Control strategies
  - Optimal selection and sizing
* Case study

### Module 3: Power Management and Lighting
* Transformer Loading/Efficiency analysis
  - Feeder/cable loss evaluation
  - Case study
* Reactive Power Management
  - Capacitor Sizing
  - Degree of Compensation
  - Case study
* Peak Demand controls
  - Methodologies
  - Industrial load management schemes
  - Case study
* Lighting
  - Energy efficient light sources
  - Energy conservation in Lighting Schemes
  - Electronic ballast
  - Power quality issues
  - Case study

### Module 4: Cooling, Heating, and Cogeneration
* Electric loads of Air conditioning and Refrigeration
  - Energy conservation measures
  - Cool storage
* Solar Water Heaters
  - Power Consumption in Compressors, electric furnaces and Energy conservation measures
*  Electrolytic Process
* Computer Controls
  - EMS
* Cogeneration
  - Case study

## References
1. Y P Abbi and Shashank Jain, “Handbook on Energy Audit and Environment Management”, TERI, 2006.
2. Albert Thumann, William J. Younger, Terry Niehus, “Handbook of Energy Audits”, 2009.
3. Giovanni Petrecca, “Industrial Energy Management: Principles and Applications”, The Kluwer international series - 207, 1999.
4. Anthony J. Pansini, Kenneth D. Smalling, “Guide to Electric Load Management”, Pennwell Pub; (1998).
5. Howard E. Jordan, “Energy-Efficient Electric Motors and Their Applications”, Plenum Pub Corp; 2nd ed., 1994.
6. Turner, Wayne C, “Energy Management Handbook”, Lilburn, The Fairmont Press, 2001.
7. Albert Thumann, “Handbook of Energy Audits”, Fairmont Pr; 5th ed. (1998).
8. Albert Thumann, P.W, “Plant Engineers and Managers Guide to Energy Conservation”, 7th ed., TWI Press Inc, Terre Haute, 2007.
9. Donald R. W., “Energy Efficiency Manual”, Energy Institute Press, 1986.
10. Partab H., “Art and Science of Utilisation of Electrical Energy”, Dhanpat Rai and Sons, New Delhi. 1975.
11. Tripathy S.C, “Electric Energy Utilization and Conservation”, Tata McGraw Hill, 1991.
12. Barney L. Capehart, Wayne C. Turner, William J. Kennedy, “Guide to Energy Management”, Fairmont Press, 6th ed., April 23, 2008.
13. Albert Thumann., William J. Younger, “Handbook of Energy Audits”, Fairmont Press, 7th ed., 2016.