---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 8
course_code: "peaot867"
course_title: "theory-of-elasticity"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PEAOT867 - Theory of Elasticity

## Course Objectives

-   To apply the fundamental principles of **elasticity**, including variation of stress, strain, and material behaviour, to analyse **deformation and mechanical response** in elastic materials.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Theory of Stress

-   Definition and notation of **stress**, and the equations of equilibrium.
-   **Principal stresses**, octahedral stress, planes of maximum shear, and stress invariants.
-   Stress transformation and **Mohr’s diagram** for a 3-dimensional state of stress.

### Module 2: Theory of Strain

-   The **displacement field** and the definition of infinitesimal strain at a point.
-   **Strain invariants**, principal strains, and octahedral strains.
-   **Compatibility equations** and strain transformation.

### Module 3: 2D Problems in Elasticity

-   The relationship between **plane stress and plane strain**.
-   **Airy’s stress functions** and their application to simple beams.
-   Analysis of stress concentration in an infinite plate with a circular hole and stresses in a **thick-walled cylinder**.

### Module 4: Torsion and Thermal Stresses

-   Stresses in **rotating discs** and cylinders.
-   **Torsion** of circular, elliptical, and triangular bars using **Prandtl’s membrane analogy**.
-   **Thermoelastic stress-strain relations** and analysis of thermal stresses in discs and cylinders.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Theory of Elasticity* – S. P. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, McGraw-Hill, 3rd edition, 2010
-   *Advanced Mechanics of solids* – L. S. Srinath, Tata McGraw Hill, 2009
-   *Theory of Elasticity* – Sadhu Singh, Khanna Publications, 2004
-   *Applied Elasticity* – T.G. Seetharamu and Govindaraju, Interline Publishing, 2007

---
