---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "electrical-and-electronics-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "eet201"
course_title: "circuits-and-networks"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# EET201: Circuits and Networks  

## Course Objectives  
* Apply circuit theorems to simplify and solve complex DC and AC electric networks.  
* Analyse dynamic DC and AC circuits and develop the complete response to excitations.  
* Solve dynamic circuits by applying transformation to the s-domain.  
* Analyse three-phase networks in Y and Δ configurations.  
* Solve series/parallel resonant circuits.  
* Develop the representation of two-port networks using network parameters and analyse them.  

## Modules  

### Module 1 – Circuit Theorems  
* DC and sinusoidal steady-state analysis with dependent and independent sources.  
* Superposition principle, Source transformation.  
* Thevenin’s, Norton’s, Maximum Power Transfer theorems, Reciprocity theorem.  

### Module 2 – Analysis of Dynamic Circuits  
* Formulation of dynamic equations for RL, RC, and RLC series/parallel networks.  
* Solutions with DC excitation and initial conditions using Laplace Transforms.  
* Time constant, damping ratio – Overdamped, underdamped, critically damped, and undamped cases.  
* Complete solution for RL, RC, and RLC circuits with sinusoidal excitation.  

### Module 3 – Transformed Circuits in s-domain  
* Transform impedance/admittance of R, L, and C.  
* Mesh and nodal analysis in s-domain.  
* Transfer function representation – Poles and zeros.  
* Coupled circuits – Dot polarity convention, sinusoidal steady-state analysis, linear transformer as a coupled circuit, analysis in s-domain.  

### Module 4 – Three-phase Networks and Resonance  
* Complex power in sinusoidal steady state.  
* Steady-state analysis of three-phase unbalanced Y and Δ circuits, neutral shift.  
* Resonance in series and parallel RLC circuits.  
* Quality factor, bandwidth, frequency response of impedance, admittance, and phase angle.  

### Module 5 – Two-port Networks  
* Driving point and transfer functions.  
* Z, Y, h, and T parameters.  
* Conditions for symmetry and reciprocity.  
* Relationships between parameter sets.  
* Interconnections of two-port networks – series, parallel, cascade.  
* T-π transformation.  

## References  
* Joseph A. Edminister and Mahmood Nahvi – *Theory and Problems in Electric Circuits*, McGraw Hill, 5th Edition, 2010.  
* Ravish R. Singh – *Network Analysis and Synthesis*, McGraw-Hill Education, 2013.  
* Hayt and Kemmerly – *Engineering Circuit Analysis*, McGraw Hill Education, 8th Edition, 2013.  
* Van Valkenberg – *Network Analysis*, Prentice Hall India, 3rd Edition, 1980.  
* K. S. Suresh Kumar – *Electric Circuit Analysis*, Pearson Publications, 2013.  
* A. Chakrabarti – *Circuit Theory Analysis and Synthesis*, Dhanpat Rai & Co., 7th Revised Edition, 2018.  
* R. Gupta – *Network Analysis and Synthesis*, S. Chand & Company Ltd., 2010.  
