---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 1
course_code: "sw1131"
course_title: "sociology-for-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1131: Sociology for Social Work 

## Course Objectives
* To provide a sociological perspective for effective Social Work practice.
* To familiarise with various Sociological concepts, social institutions and its use in Social Work Profession.

## Course Content

### Module I - Sociology
* Sociology: Meaning and Definition
* Nature and Scope of Sociology

### Module II - Sociological Concepts 
* Society: Meaning, Definition and Features
* Community: Definition, Characteristics and Types of Community
* Association : Definition and Characteristics
* Institution: Definition and Characteristics
* Culture: Definition, Characteristics -Cultural Traits, Types and Cultural Lag 

### Module III - Social Institutions
* Family: Definition, Characteristics, Functions and Types -Nuclear, Joint and Extended - Family Disorganization
* Marriage: Definition, Functions and Types -Monogamy, Polygamy Polyandry and Polygyny, Exogamy, Endogamy and Same Sex Marriage
* Religion and Caste: Definition and Meaning
* Education: Meaning, Definition and Types- Formal, Informal, Non- formal Education

### Module IV - Socialisation

* Meaning and Definition
* Process of Socialization: Imitation, Suggestion, Identification and Language
* Agencies of Socialization: Family, School, Peer Group, Religion and State

### Module V - Application of Social Theories in Social Work
* Importance of Sociology in Practice of Social Work,
* Application of Social Theories in Social Work - Examples -Looking glass Theory of
Self- C H Cooley
* Ecological Systems Theory- Urie Bronfenbrenner

## References
1. Ghurye . G. S., Caste, Class and Occupation, Popular Book Depot, Bombay 1961 (Revised Edn. Caste and Race in India).
2. Gouldner Alvyn W. Gouldner Helen P., Modern Sociology; An introduction to the Study of Human Interaction, Hacourt Brace and world. New York, 1963.
3. Kapadia K. M. – Marriage and Family in India, Oxford University Press, London, 1957.
4. Jain PC – Social Movements among Tribals, New Delhi. 1991
5. Pandey , A.K – Tribal Society in India, New Delhi. 1997
6. Sharma S – Social Movements of Social Change. New Delhi. 1985
7. Srinivas, M.N – Village, Caste, Gender and Method (Essay in Indian Social Anthropology), New Delhi. 1996
8. Jeffrey c Alexander & Kenneth Thompson, Sociology, Paradigm Publications.
9. Francis Abraham, Sociological thought.
10. Ram Ahuja, Society in India.
11. M N Srinivas, Indian Social structure.
12. SC Dube, Indian society.
13. Ram Ahuja, Indian social systems.
14. Francis Abraham : Contemporary Sociology (Oxford publication).
