---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cst416"
course_title: "formal-methods-and-tools-in-software-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST416: Formal Methods and Tools in Software Engineering  

## Course Objectives  
* Explain the need and use of formal methods and tools in software engineering.  
* Demonstrate conceptual modelling of systems using Alloy.  
* Illustrate the process of proving correctness of code using Hoare-Triple based weakest precondition analysis.  
* Demonstrate program verification using VCC.  

## Modules  

### Module 1 – Introduction  
* Stages in software development.  
* Software defects – causes of software defects.  
* Techniques for dealing with software defects – testing and verification, formal methods and tools.  

### Module 2 – Ensuring Reliability in the Design Phase  
* Conceptual modelling and the tool Alloy.  
* Conceptual modelling in Alloy, analysing Alloy models, fixing bugs in modelling.  
* How Alloy works.  
* Showing that the Königsberg Bridge Problem has no solution.  

### Module 3 – Verification by Model Checking  
* Verifier for Concurrent C (VCC) – a Hoare-Triple-based tool for verifying Concurrent C.  
* Intra-procedure verification of programs, ghost statements.  

### Module 4 – Program Verification  
* Inter-procedure verification of programs in VCC.  
* Function contracts, pure functions, loop invariants.  
* Proving total correctness of programs in VCC.  

### Module 5 – Ghost Language and Ownership in VCC  
* Ghost Language of VCC – modelling programs in the ghost language.  
* Verification of a C program with respect to a ghost model.  
* Ownerships in VCC, refinement for proving correctness, proving refinements in VCC.  
* Example problems.  

## References  
* Daniel Jackson – *Software Abstractions*, MIT Press, 2011.  
* Tutorial for Alloy Analyzer 4.0.  
* E. Cohen, M. A., Hillebrand, S. Tobies, M. Moskal, W. Schulte – *Verifying C Programs: A VCC Tutorial*, Working Draft, Version 0.2, July 10, 2015.  
* The VCC Manual, Working Draft, Version 0.2, April 7, 2016.  
