---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "pcaot302"
course_title: "engineering-thermodynamics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PCAOT302 - Engineering Thermodynamics

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the fundamental concepts of Engineering Thermodynamics.
2.  To discuss various thermodynamic cycles and processes.
3.  To understand the laws of thermodynamics that quantify energy and its interactions with the surroundings.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Basic Concepts and First Law of Thermodynamics

-   Basic Concepts: Macroscopic and Microscopic viewpoints, Concept of
Continuum, Thermodynamic system and Control Volume, Thermodynamic
Equilibrium, State, Properties, Specific heat, Path function and point
Function, Process-types, Cycle, Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics, First law
of Thermodynamics, Internal Energy, Enthalpy, PMM I - Joule’s
Experiment, First law applied to Non-flow process and Flow processesSteady Flow Energy Equation. (Numerical on work done and heat
transformation)

### Module 2: Second Law of Thermodynamics and Entropy

-   Limitations of the First Law. Second Law statements (Kelvin-Planck, Clausius). Heat engines, heat pumps, Carnot's principle,  Clausius Inequality. Concepts of Entropy, Availability, Irreversibility, and Thermodynamic Potentials, Third Law of Thermodynamics. (Numerical).

### Module 3: Thermodynamic Cycles

-   Thermodynamic cycles: Power cycles, Otto cycle, Diesel cycle, Dual
Combustion cycle, Brayton cycle P–V and T-S diagram, Thermal
Efficiency, Comparison of Cycles, Reheat and Regeneration cycle
(Numerical).
Refrigeration cycles- reverse Carnot cycle, reverse Brayton cycle, Air
refrigeration cycles(T-S diagram and Description only)
Psychrometric Properties-Dry & Wet Bulb Temperature, Specific Humidity,
Relative Humidity, Degree of saturation – Adiabatic Saturation –
Psychrometric chart. 

### Module 4: General Thermodynamic Relations

-   Combined First and Second law
equations Maxwell relations, T-ds equations, Clapeyron Equations equation,
equation for internal energy, enthalpy and entropy, specific heat, Throttling
and Free Expansion Processes Joule Thomson coefficient and inversion
curve. Perfect Gas Laws – Equation of State, Deviations from perfect Gas
Model – Vander Waals Equation of State.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Engineering Thermodynamics* – Nag.P.K, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2013
-   *Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach* – Yunus A. Cengel and Michael A. Boles, McGraw-Hill, 7th edition, 2010
-   *Engineering Thermodynamics through examples* – YVC Rao, Universities Press, 2011
-   *Thermodynamics* – Arora C.P, Tata McGraw-Hil, 2003
-   *Thermodynamics* – Holman.J.P, McGraw-Hill, 3rd edition, 2007
-   *Thermodynamics for Engineers* – Merala C, Pother, Craig W, Somerton, Schaum Outline Series, 2004
-   *Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics* – Rathakrishnan E, Prentice-Hall India, 2005

---
