---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 8
course_code: "peaot868"
course_title: "boundary-layer-theory"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PEAOT868 - Boundary Layer Theory

## Course Objectives

-   To introduce students to the section of **Boundary Layers** and its associated parameters to get a deeper essence of the fluid interactions across various thermodynamic regimes in dynamic mode.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Basic Concepts of Viscous Flows

-   Introduction to **hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layer theory**.
-   Governing equations with the effect of viscosity.
-   Definitions of **boundary layer thickness**: displacement, momentum, and energy thickness.

### Module 2: Solutions to Boundary Layer Flows

-   **Blasius’ exact solution** for boundary layer flow over a flat plate.
-   **Von Karman's approximate solution**.
-   Analysis of flow with pressure gradients and **Couette flow**.

### Module 3: Thermal Boundary Layers

-   **Heat transfer** from heated and cold surfaces.
-   **Thermal boundary layer growth** and analysis.
-   Exact and approximate solutions to thermal boundary layer flow problems.

### Module 4: Turbulent Boundary Layers

-   Fundamentals of **turbulent flow**, including mean motion fluctuations.
-   **Reynolds Equations** and **Reynolds stresses**.
-   **Prandtl’s mixing length theory** and velocity distribution laws.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Fluid Mechanics* – R. K. Bansal, Laxmi Publications, 2005
-   *Heat Transfer* – R.K. Rajput, S. Chand Publications, 2019
-   *Introduction to Fluid Mechanics* – Edward J. Shaughnessy, et al., Oxford University Press, 2005
-   *Boundary Layer Theory* – Hermann Schlichting, Springer-Verlag, 2000
-   *Further Aerodynamics for Engineering Students* – E. L. Houghton and R. P. Boswell, Edward Arnold, 1969

---
