---
country: "india"
university: "mahatma-gandhi-university"
branch: "computer-applications-honours"
version: "2024"
semester: "1"
course_code: "mg1dscbca103"
course_title: "discrete-mathematics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Amendamaria"
---
# MG1DSCBCA103 - Discrete Mathematics

This course introduces basic concepts of Set Theory, Logic, Relations, functions, and Matrices. The basic ideas of Sets and Propositional Logic are further expanded. The mathematical significance of Relations and functions is explained. Various mathematical manipulations involved in Matrices are properly illustrated. Students acquire skills in applying concepts in Propositional Logic and Relations in different branches of computer science.

---
## Course Objectives

* Understand Concepts of Set Theory.
* Evaluate problems on Set theory.
* Understand Propositional Logic.
* Identify and Apply Propositional Logic.
* Evaluate problems using Truth tables and Logical operators.
* Understand And Analyse different types and properties of Relations, functions, and Equivalence Relations.
* Understand concepts of Matrix and Matrix Operators.
* Evaluate the Inverse of a Matrix and the solution of a system of Non-homogeneous Equations.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Set Logic and Proofs
* *Propositional Logic:* Introduction and Propositional Equivalences.
* *Rules of Inferences:* Rules of Inferences for Propositional Logic.

### Module 2: Set Theory
* *Sets:* Introduction to Set Theory.
* *Operations:* Set operations.
* *Functions:* Introduction to functions.

### Module 3: Relations
* *Properties:* Relations and their Properties.
* *Representation:* Representing relations.
* *Equivalence:* Equivalence relations.

### Module 4: Matrices
* *Types:* Definition and different types of Matrices, Symmetric and Skew-Symmetric Matrices.
* *Operations:* Matrix operations, Determinant, and Matrix inverse.
* *System of Equations:* Solution of a system of Non-homogeneous equations by Matrix method and Cramer's rule.

---
## References
* **Core References:**
    * Kenneth. H. Rosen - Discrete Mathematics and its applications, 6th edition
    * B.S Grewal - Higher Engineering Mathematics, 40th Edition, Khanna Publications
* **Suggested Readings:**
    * Erwin Kreyszig - Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Wiley, India.
    * S.S Sastry - Engineering Mathematics Volume 1, 4th edition PHI.