---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "est120"
course_title: "basics-of-civil-and-mechanical-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@9sreerag7"
---

# est120: BASICS OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL ENGINEERING

## course outcomes

- **co 1**: recall the role of civil engineer in society and to relate the various disciplines of civil engineering.  
- **co 2**: explain different types of buildings, building components, building materials and building construction.  
- **co 3**: describe the importance, objectives and principles of surveying.  
- **co 4**: summarise the basic infrastructure services mep, hvac, elevators, escalators and ramps.  
- **co 5**: discuss the materials, energy systems, water management and environment for green buildings.  
- **co 6**: analyse thermodynamic cycles and calculate its efficiency.  
- **co 7**: illustrate the working and features of ic engines.  
- **co 8**: explain the basic principles of refrigeration and air conditioning.  
- **co 9**: describe the working of hydraulic machines.  
- **co 10**: explain the working of power transmission elements.  
- **co 11**: describe the basic manufacturing, metal joining and machining processes.  

## course contents

### module 1  
general introduction to civil engineering: relevance of civil engineering in the overall infrastructural development of the country. responsibility of an engineer in ensuring the safety of built environment. brief introduction to major disciplines of civil engineering like transportation engineering, structural engineering, geo-technical engineering, water resources engineering and environmental engineering.  
introduction to buildings: types of buildings, selection of site for buildings, components of a residential building and their functions.  
building rules and regulations: relevance of nbc, kbr & crz norms (brief discussion only).  
building area: plinth area, built up area, floor area, carpet area and floor area ratio for a building as per kbr.  

### module 2  
surveying: importance, objectives and principles.  
construction materials, conventional construction materials: types, properties and uses of building materials: bricks, stones, cement, sand and timber  
cement concrete: constituent materials, properties and types.  
steel: steel sections and steel reinforcements, types and uses.  
modern construction materials: architectural glass, ceramics, plastics, composite materials, thermal and acoustic insulating materials, decorative panels, waterproofing materials. modern uses of gypsum, pre-fabricated building components (brief discussion only).  

### module 3  
building construction: foundations: bearing capacity of soil (definition only), functions of foundations, types – shallow and deep (brief discussion only). load bearing and framed structures (concept only).  
brick masonry: header and stretcher bond, english bond & flemish bond, random rubble masonry.  
roofs and floors: functions, types; flooring materials (brief discussion only).  
basic infrastructure services: mep, hvac, elevators, escalators and ramps (civil engineering aspects only), fire safety for buildings.  
green buildings: materials, energy systems, water management and environment for green buildings (brief discussion only).  

### module 4  
analysis of thermodynamic cycles: carnot, otto, diesel cycles, derivation of efficiency of these cycles, problems to calculate heat added, heat rejected, net work and efficiency.  
ic engines: ci, si, 2-stroke, 4-stroke engines. listing the parts of different types of ic engines. efficiencies of ic engines (definitions only), air, fuel, cooling and lubricating systems in si and ci engines, crdi, mpfi. concept of hybrid engines.  

### module 5  
refrigeration: unit of refrigeration, reversed carnot cycle, cop, vapour compression cycle (only description and no problems); definitions of dry, wet & dew point temperatures, specific humidity and relative humidity, cooling and dehumidification, layout of unit and central air conditioners.  
description about working with sketches of: reciprocating pump, centrifugal pump, pelton turbine, francis turbine and kaplan turbine. overall efficiency, problems on calculation of input and output power of pumps and turbines (no velocity triangles).  
description about working with sketches of: belt and chain drives, gear and gear trains, single plate clutches.  

### module 6  
manufacturing process: basic description of the manufacturing processes – sand casting, forging, rolling, extrusion and their applications.  
metal joining processes: list types of welding, description with sketches of arc welding, soldering and brazing and their applications.  
basic machining operations: turning, drilling, milling and grinding.  
description about working with block diagram of: lathe, drilling machine, milling machine, cnc machine. principle of cad/cam, rapid and additive manufacturing.  

## reference books

1. chen w.f and liew j y r (eds), *the civil engineering handbook*, ii edition, crc press (taylor and francis)  
2. chudley, r and greeno, r, *building construction handbook*, addison wesley, longman group, england  
3. chudley, r, *construction technology*, vol. i to iv, longman group, england  
4. kandya, a. a., *elements of civil engineering*, charotar publishing house  
5. mamlouk, m. s., and zaniewski, j. p., *materials for civil and construction engineering*, pearson publishers  
6. rangwala, s.c. and dalal, k. b., *building construction*, charotar publishing house  
7. clifford, m., simmons, k. and shipway, p., *an introduction to mechanical engineering part i*, crc press  
8. roy and choudhary, *elements of mechanical engineering*, media promoters & publishers pvt. ltd., mumbai  
9. sawhney, g. s., *fundamentals of mechanical engineering*, phi  
10. g shanmugam, m s palanichamy, *basic civil and mechanical engineering*, mcgraw hill education; first edition, 2018  
11. benjamin, j., *basic mechanical engineering*, pentex books, 9th edition, 2018  
12. balachandran, p., *basic mechanical engineering*, owl books  
