---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "6"
course_code: "aot302"
course_title: "heat-transfer"
language: "english"
contributor: "@9sreerag7"
---

# AOT302: Heat Transfer

## Course Objectives

- Formulate and solve heat conduction problems with temperature dependent thermal properties, heat generation and across multi-layer materials.
- Solve forced and free convection problems using boundary layer concepts and empirical solutions. Use of important non-dimensional parameters.
- Solve radiation problems using basic radiation laws like Planck’s law, Wein’s displacement law and Kirchoff’s law.
- Solve design problems involving heat exchangers.
- Develop familiarity with special problems encountered in high speed flights and design of cooling systems and ablative heat shields.

## Course Contents 

### Module 1

- Introduction to heat transfer and its relation to thermodynamics.
- Basic modes of heat transfer and the laws governing them.
- Fourier’s law and derivation of general three-dimensional heat conduction equation and the boundary conditions.
- One dimensional steady state heat conduction in composite mediums and with variable thermal properties and heat generation.
- Idea of electrical analogy and use of thermal resistance and capacitance concepts.
- Idea of critical thickness of insulation.
- Heat transfer in extended surfaces and design of fins.
- One dimensional transient heat conduction analysis and the idea of lumped mass analysis and its validity.
- Use of similarity solutions for heat transfer problems in semi-infinite and infinite solids.
- Application of non-dimensional parameters Fourier number and Biot number and the use of transient temperature (Heisler’s) charts.

### Module 2

- Free and forced convection and non-dimensional parameters: Nusselt, Prandtl, Eckert, and Grashof numbers.
- Free convection in atmosphere.
- Free convection on a vertical flat plate.
- Empirical relation for heat transfer.
- Concept of laminar and turbulent convective heat transfer analysis using the boundary layer concepts in flows between parallel plates, over a flat plate and in a circular pipe.
- Need and application of numerical techniques in solving heat transfer problems.
- Use of finite difference method for solving steady state heat conduction problems.

### Module 3

- Introduction to physical mechanism of radiation heat transfer.
- Radiation properties of materials and their wave length dependence.
- Planck’s radiation law.
- Wein’s displacement law and Kirchoff’s law.
- Formulation of radiation shape factors for different geometries.
- Concept of radiosity.
- Stefan-Boltzmann law.
- Heat exchange between non-black bodies.
- Design of radiation shields.

### Module 4

- Heat exchangers and their classifications and applications.
- Temperature distribution in parallel flow and counter-flow heat exchangers.
- Concept of overall heat transfer coefficient.
- Design of heat exchangers using LMTD and ε-NTU methods.
- Special heat exchangers like boilers and condensers and compact heat exchangers.

### Module 5

- Heat transfer problems in high-speed hypersonic flows.
- Adiabatic wall temperature and the idea of recovery factor and Eckert number.
- Various cooling techniques and heat transfer in combustion chambers.
- Ablation process materials and their applications in thermal protection against aerodynamic heating.
- Concept of moving boundary value problems and its application to the design of ablative heat shields.

## References

- *S.C. Sachdeva, “Fundamentals of Engineering Heat & Mass Transfer”, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, 1981.*
- *Yunus A. Cengel, “Heat Transfer – A Practical Approach”, Tata McGraw Hill Edition, 2003.*
- *P.K. Nag, “Heat and Mass Transfer”, Third edition, Tata McGraw Hill publications, 2011.*
- *F.P. Incropera and D.P. Dewitt, “Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer”, John Wiley and Sons, 2006.*
- *Frank Kreith, Raj M. Manglik, Mark S. Bohn, “Principles of Heat Transfer”, Seventh Edition, Cengage Learning, 2011.*
- *C.Y. Chow, “Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics”, John Wiley, 1979.*
- *J.P. Holman, “Heat Transfer”, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York, 6e, 1991.*
- *John H. Lienhard, “A Heat Transfer Text Book”, Prentice Hall Inc., 1981.*
- *P. S. Ghoshdasidar, “Computer Simulation of Flow and Heat Transfer”, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New Delhi, 1998.*
- *M. Necati Ozisik, “Heat Transfer: A Basic Approach”, McGraw Hill, New York, 2005.*
