---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "24-360-0102"
course_title: "environmental-chemistry"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0102: ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY

## Course Objectives
* The main objective of the course is to equip students with the knowledge of the chemical species and processes in the various spheres of the environment and the interactions to enable them to master to identify the specific issues and inter-relate them to the domain of environmental education to find suitable solutions to pollution hazards and protection. 
* The students must be able to apply the focal concepts from multiple sub-disciplines of environmental chemistry, use technical and analytical skills to understand the level and effects of chemicals in environment such as air, water, soil, biota, assess the impact of chemical exposure on living systems and finally they will be equipped with full potential and capacity to emerge as competent environmental analytical chemists in the practicing core areas and familiarise the sophisticated instruments in analytical chemistry.


## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Have insight on fundamental characteristics of the various spheres (atmosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere, biosphere and anthrosphere) of the environment. Explain the sources, reactions, transport, effects and fates of pollutants in environment.
* **CO 2:** Describe the effects of human activity on air, water and soil quality.
* **CO 3:** Acquire experience in field studies related with monitoring of water, air and soil quality parameters.

## Course Content

### Module - I Chemistry of Atmosphere
* Definition and importance of atmosphere- Chemical Composition of unpolluted air at sea level-Thermal Stratification of the atmosphere and Chemical Speciation in its different layers Chemical and photochemical reaction in the atmosphere. Reactions of atmospheric nitrogen, oxygen, ozone and water. Role of CO2 in the atmosphere. Chemical processes for the formation of organic and inorganic particulate matter- Composition of organic and inorganic particlesReactions involving particles in the atmosphere. Introduction to Anthropogenic Changes in the Atmosphere: Ozone layer depletion, Photochemical smog


### Module - II Chemistry of Hydrosphere
* Definition of Hydrosphere-Importance of water-Distribution of water on the earth- Hydrological cycle-Characteristics of natural waters and processes that affect their composition-Structure of water- Unique properties of water and their environmental significance-Solubility of gases in water, Acid-base, redox and complexation reactions in water. Oxygen demanding materials, Concept of BOD and COD

### Module - III Chemistry of Lithosphere
* Introduction-Definition of geosphere- nature of solids in the geosphere- kinds of minerals and rocks and their properties- rock cycle- stages of weathering-physical, chemical and biological aspects of weathering- sediments-clays-Ground water in the geosphere. Distribution of water in earth, hydrology and hydrogeology, major basins and groundwater provinces of India, Geological weathering reactions, erosion, transportation and deposition of sediments. Geochemical classification of elements, abundance of elements in earth crust. Biogeochemical cycles of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorous and sulphur

### Module - IV Soil Chemistry
* Soil: Definition and importance - soil formation- soil horizon and soil profile. Soil forming minerals and process of soil formation, Identification and characterization of clay minerals, Soil physical and chemical properties, soil types and climate control on soil formation, Cation exchange capacity and mineralogical controls. Composition and physiochemical properties of soil- Water, air, organic and inorganic components of soil


### Module - V Environmental Chemical Analysis
* Analysis of Air: Air sampling techniques and analytical methods for monitoring SO2, NOX, CO, H2S and Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM). Analysis of Water and Wastewater: Sampling, preservation, storage, pre-treatment and analytical methods (one each) for the measurement of the following parameters : colour, turbidity, electrical conductivity, acidity, alkalinity, hardness, DO, BOD, COD, pH, redox potential, chloride, fluoride, nitrite, nitrate, ammonia, phosphate, silicate and Metals. Analysis of Soils: Sampling and storage, Pre-treatment, Extraction of organic contaminants, extraction of available ions-Dissolution technique for the determination of total metal concentration in soil- Determination of pH, Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC), total and available metal ions

## References
1. Balaram Pani.; (2017). –Textbook of Environmental Chemistry, 2/e, ISBN:9789386768025, Pages : 594.
2. Popek, E.; (2017). –Sampling and Analysis of Environmental Chemical Pollutants, A Complete Guide.
2nd Edition, ISBN: 9780128032022, Elsevier.
3. Colin, B.; Michael, C.; (2012). –Environmental Chemistry. 5th Edition: ed W.H.Freeman & Co Ltd,
ISBN: 9781464113499, pages: 736.
4. Stanley, E. M.; (2010). –Environmental Chemistry. 9th Edition, CRC Press, London.
5. James, E. G.; (2009). –Principles of Environmental Chemistry. Publisher: Jones & Bartlett; ISBN: 0763759392.
6. John, H.; Seinfeld.; Spyros, N. P.; (2006). –Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics. 2nd edition, John Wiley.
7. Andrew, D. E.;, Lenore, S. G.; Eugene, W. R.; Arnold, E. G.; (Eds) (2005). –Standards Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater Analysis. 21st Edition, APHA, Washington DC.
8. Roger, N.; Reeve.; (2002). –Introduction to Environmental Analysis. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester.
9. Fifield, F.W.; (2000). –Environmental Analytical Chemistry. 2nd edition, Blackwell Publishers.
10. Daniel, J. J.; (1999). –Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry. Princeton University Press.
11. Harrison, R.M.; (1995). –Pollution: Causes, Effects and Control. The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge.
12. Peter, O. W.; (1976). –Analysis of Air Pollutants. John Wiley & Sons, New York.