---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "24-360-0103"
course_title: "environmental-physics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0103: ENVIRONMENTAL PHYSICS

## Course Objectives
* The primary aim of this course is to gain a comprehensive understanding of the Earth’s diverse physical systems and the intricate relationships between the Earth and the Sun, which significantly influence the Earth’s environmental conditions. Additionally, it seeks to explore how these physical processes sculpt the Earth’s surface features. 
* This course delves into the complex and ever-changing interactions within the Earth System, with a particular focus on the key elements of earth sciences, atmospheric dynamics, oceanography, geoelogy, and the impacts of climate change. This includes an exploration of various interactions, thermodynamics, atmospheric stability, cloud formation and precipitation patterns, hydrological cycles, and the fundamental structure and composition of the Earth. Through an in-depth examination of the forces that drive the Earth’s atmosphere, water cycle, solid earth, and their interactions, students will embark on a journey to thoroughly understand the climate system.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Gain a thorough insight into the Earth-Sun dynamics, focusing on how solar radiation shapes our climate, weather patterns, and energy distribution worldwide.
* **CO 2:** Acquire knowledge on atmospheric composition and structure, and the thermodynamic principles that govern weather patterns and the global energy balance.
* **CO 3:** Asses the concepts of atmospheric stability, cloud formation mechanisms, and the processes leading to various types of precipitation.
* **CO 4:** Examine the natural and anthropogenic factors influencing climate change and variability in global and regional scales.
* **CO 5:** Understanding of the processes in ocean and lithosphere, and their impacts on climate.


## Course Content

### Module - I Sun-Earth System
* Solar radiation, Terrestrial radiation, Radiation laws, Seasons. Global distribution of solar radiation, Effect of atmosphere on solar radiation - Scattering, Absorption and Reflection, Earth’s albedo, Greenhouse Effect, Global Warming


### Module - II Atmospheric Composition and Thermodynamics
* Composition of dry air, Atmospheric water vapour content. Energy budget of the earth, Mean heat balance of the earth-atmosphere system, General circulation of the atmosphere, Forces and force balance, State and Structure of Atmosphere - Pressure, temperature, humidity, Vertical thermal structure of the atmosphere. Potential temperature, virtual temperature, isothermal and adiabatic processes, dry and saturated adiabatic lapse rates

### Module - III Atmospheric Stability, Clouds and Precipitation
* Stable, unstable and neutral equilibria. Inversions. Atmospheric Boundary Layer, Cloud formation and classification - Aerosols, condensation and ice nuclei, droplet growth - curvature and solute effects, precipitation mechanisms. Weather modification

### Module - IV Climate Variability and Climate Change
* Weather and Climate - Climatic zones, Climate change, Natural changes and anthropogenic causes of climate change, Climate variability - El Nino, La Nina and ENSO events. Tropical Cyclones, Indian Monsoon, Thermal circulations and Local winds, Land and Sea breeze

### Module - V Oceanography and Geological Processes
* General Circulation of Oceans - Winds and surface circulation - Characteristics of convergence, divergence, upwelling and sinking of ocean waters, Ekman spiral and Ekman transport. Vertical structure of oceans, Thermohaline conveyor belt. Crust, mantle, core, earth‘s magnetic field. Recycling of the Lithosphere - The rock cycle, weathering and erosion, sedimentation, metamorphism. Concept of plate tectonics and continental drift. Geological time-scales. Geological Hazards - Floods, Landslides, Earthquakes, Volcanism, Avalanche

## References
1. C. Donald Ahrens, Robert Henson (2021). Meteorology Today: An Introduction to Weather, Climate, and the Environment, 13th Edition, Cengage, Boston.
2. Dennis L. Hartmann (2016). Global Physical Climatology, 2nd Edition, Elsevier Science.
3. John M. Wallace, Peter V. Hobbs (2006). Atmospheric Science, An Introductory Survey, 2nd Edition, Elsevier Science.
4. Alan P. Trujillo, Harold V. Thurman (2020). Essentials of Oceanography, 13th Edition, Pearson.
5. Roger G. Barry, Richard J Chorley (2010). Atmosphere, Weather and Climate, 9th Edition, Taylor & Francis, 2010.
6. Roland B. Stull (1988). An Introduction to Boundary Layer Meteorology, Springer.
7. C. Nick Hewitt, Andrea V. Jackson (2020). Atmospheric Science for Environmental Scientists, John Wiley & Sons.
8. Houghton, John. Global Warming (5th edition). Cambridge University Press, United Kingdom. 2015.