---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "sw1331"
course_title: "economics-for-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1331: Economics for Social Work 

## Course Objectives
1. To introduce basic economic concepts and principles applicable in Social Work Practice.
2. To enable them to identify and analyze economic problems with a Social Work perspective.

## Course Content
### Module 1 - Introduction to Economics
* Definition
* Fundamental Economic Concepts
* The central economic problem – scarcity and choice
* Factors of Production – Land Labour Capital and Organisation
* Economic Systems
* Economic Institutions
* Subject Matter of Economics – Micro and Macro Economics
* Importance of study of economics for social work

### Module 2 - Theory of Demand and Supply
* The concept of utility
* Demand: demand function, law of demand, elasticity of demand
* Production and production functions
* Supply and the determinants of supply, Law of supply, elasticity of supply 

### Module 3 - Basic Economic Systems
* Meaning ,definition, merits and demerits – Capitalism, Socialism, mixed economy
* Liberalization, privatization and globalization

### Module 4 - National Income 
* National Income – meaning and concepts
* Use of national income accounting
* Important National income aggregates – GDP, GNP, NDP, NNP
* Measurement of National Income, Per capita Income

### Module 5 - Developmental Economics
* Economic Growth and economic development
* Sustainable Development
* Underdevelopment, Obstacles of economic development
* Indicators of Human Development
* PQLI & HDI – Components and calculation
* AmartyaSen’s Capability approach
* Basic Features of Indian and Kerala Economy, Kerala Model of Development

## References
1. Ackerman Frank (ed.) – Human Wellbeing and Economic Gains, Washington DC. 1997
2. Aggarwal, Ashish – GATT and Developing Countries. New Delhi. 1994
3. Batra G.S; Narinder Kaur – GATT and Implications of Dunkel Proposal, New Delhi. 1994
4. Carse Robert, Vijay Joshy (ed.) – The Future of Economic Reforms, New Delhi. 1995
5. Chakraborthy, Binal – The UN and the Third World Shifting Paradigm, New Delhi. 1996
6. Rugman Alan – The End of Globalisation, London.
7. Sen – Development as Freedom. 2000.
8. Ruddar Datt &. K.P.M. Sundharam- Indian Economy. 2011.