---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "cst203"
course_title: "discrete-mathematical-structures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@9sreerag7"

---

# CST203: Discrete Mathematical Structures

## Course Objectives

* Check the validity of predicates in Propositional and Quantified Propositional Logic using truth tables, deductive reasoning and inference theory on Propositional Logic (Cognitive Knowledge Level: Apply)
* Solve counting problems by applying the elementary counting techniques - Rule of Sum, Rule of Product, Permutation, Combination, Binomial Theorem, Pigeonhole Principle and Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion (Cognitive Knowledge Level: Apply)
* Classify binary relations into various types and illustrate an application for each type of binary relation, in Computer Science (Cognitive Knowledge Level: Understand)
* Illustrate an application for Partially Ordered Sets and Complete Lattices, in Computer Science (Cognitive Knowledge Level: Apply)
* Explain Generating Functions and solve First Order and Second Order Linear Recurrence Relations with Constant Coefficients (Cognitive Knowledge Level: Apply)
* Illustrate the abstract algebraic systems - Semigroups, Monoids, Groups, Homomorphism and Isomorphism of Monoids and Groups (Cognitive Knowledge Level: Understand)

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Fundamentals of Logic)
* Mathematical logic - Basic connectives and truth table, Statements, Logical Connectives, Tautology, Contradiction.
* Logical Equivalence - The Laws of Logic, The Principle of duality, Substitution Rules.
* The implication - The Contrapositive, The Converse, The Inverse.
* Logical Implication - Rules of Inference.
* The use of Quantifiers - Open Statement, Quantifier.
* Logically Equivalent – Contrapositive, Converse, Inverse, Logical equivalences and implications for quantified statement, Implications, Negation.

### Module - 2 (Fundamentals of Counting Theory)
* The Rule of Sum – Extension of Sum Rule.
* The Rule of Product - Extension of Product Rule.
* Permutations, Combinations.
* The Binomial Theorem (without proof), Combination with Repetition.
* The Pigeonhole Principle.
* The Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion Theorem (Without Proof) - Generalization of the Principle.
* Derangements.

### Module - 3 (Relations and Functions)
* Cartesian Product - Binary Relation.
* Function – domain, range, one-to-one function, Image-restriction.
* Properties of Relations - Reachability Relations, Reflexive Relations, Symmetric Relations, Transitive relations, Anti-symmetric Relations, Partial Order relations, Equivalence Relations, Irreflexive relations.
* Partially ordered Set – Hasse Diagram, Maximal-Minimal Element, Least upper bound (lub), Greatest Lower bound (glb) (Topological sorting Algorithm - excluded).
* Equivalence Relations and Partitions - Equivalence Class.
* Lattice - Dual Lattice, Sub lattice, Properties of glb and lub, Properties of Lattice, Special Lattice, Complete Lattice, Bounded Lattice, Distributive Lattice.

### Module - 4 (Generating Functions and Recurrence Relations)
* Generating Function - Definition and Examples, Calculation techniques, Exponential generating function.
* First order linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients – homogeneous, non-homogeneous Solution.
* Second order linear recurrence relations with constant coefficients – homogeneous, non-homogeneous Solution.

### Module - 5 (Algebraic Structures)
* Algebraic system - properties - Homomorphism and Isomorphism.
* Semigroup and monoid – cyclic monoid, sub semigroup and sub monoid, Homomorphism and Isomorphism of Semigroup and monoids.
* Group - Elementary properties, subgroup, symmetric group on three symbols.
* The direct product of two groups, Group Homomorphism, Isomorphism of groups, Cyclic group.
* Right cosets - Left cosets. Lagrange’s Theorem.

## References

* Ralph P Grimaldi, B V Ramana, **Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics (An Applied Introduction)**, 5th Edition, Pearson.
* Kenneth H. Rosen, **Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications with Combinatorics and Graph Theory**, Seventh Edition, MGH, 2011.
* Trembly J.P and Manohar R, **Discrete Mathematical Structures with Applications to Computer Science**, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2003.
* Bernard Kolman, Robert C. Busby, Sharan Cutler Ross, **Discrete Mathematical Structures**, Pearson Education Pvt Ltd., New Delhi, 2003.
* Kenneth H. Rosen, **Discrete Mathematics and its Applications**, 5/e, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2003.
* Richard Johnsonbaugh, **Discrete Mathematics**, 5/e, Pearson Education Asia, New Delhi, 2002.
* Joe L Mott, Abraham Kandel, Theodore P Baker, **Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists and Mathematicians**.
