---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "eee"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "peeet413"
course_title: "mathematics-for-machine-learning"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PEEET413 - Mathematics for Machine Learning

## Course Objectives

1.  To introduce the mathematical foundations of basic Machine Learning concepts on which ML systems are built.
2.  To understand the mathematical principles in Machine Learning to aid in the creation, understanding, and debugging of new and existing solutions.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Linear Algebra

-   Systems of Linear Equations, Matrices, Vector Spaces, Linear Independence, Basis and Rank. Linear Mappings, Matrix Representation of Linear Mappings, Basis Change, Image and Kernel.

### Module 2: Analytic Geometry and Matrix Decompositions

-   Norms, Inner Products, Lengths, Distances, Orthogonality, Orthogonal Projections, and Gram-Schmidt Orthogonalization. Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors, Cholesky Decomposition, Eigen decomposition, and Singular Value Decomposition (SVD).

### Module 3: Vector Calculus

-   Differentiation of univariate functions, partial differentiation, gradients of vector-valued functions and matrices. Backpropagation, automatic differentiation, and Multivariate Taylor Series.

### Module 4: Probability and Optimization

-   Construction of a Probability Space, Bayes’ Theorem, Summary Statistics, Gaussian Distribution. Optimization using Gradient Descent (with momentum), Constrained Optimization with Lagrange Multipliers, and Convex Optimization (Linear & Quadratic Programming).

---

## Reference Books

-   *Mathematics for Machine Learning* – Marc Peter Deisenroth, A. Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong, Cambridge University Press
-   *Linear Algebra and Its Applications* – Gilbert Strang, 4th Edition
-   *Linear Algebra Done Right* – Axler, Sheldon, Springer, 2015
-   *Introduction to Applied Linear Algebra* – Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe, Cambridge University Press, 2018
-   *Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning* – Christopher M Bishop, Springer, 2006
-   *Convex Optimization* – Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe, Cambridge University Press, 2004
-   *Learning with Kernels – Support Vector Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond* – Bernhard Scholkopf and Alexander J Smola, MIT Press, 2002
-   *Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms* – David J. C MacKay, Cambridge University Press, 2003
-   *Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective* – Kevin P Murphy, MIT Press, 2012
-   *The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory* – Vladimir N Vapnik, Springer, 2000

---
