---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "24-360-0101"
course_title: "environmental-biology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0101: ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY

## Course Objectives
1. Understand Foundations of Ecology
2. Explore Population Dynamics
3. Examine Community Dynamics
4. Investigate Ecosystem Functioning
5. Apply Ecology to Conservation

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Understand the historical development and fundamental concepts of ecology.
* **CO 2:** To Analyze population characteristics and dynamics, to assess the roles of species in community ecology and population balance.
* **CO 3:** To Evaluate the processes of succession, To understand their structure, stability, and resilience.
* **CO 4:** To Examine energy flows, nutrient cycling, and landscape connectivity, to assess ecosystem functioning and health.
* **CO 5:** Apply principles of conservation biology to analyze threats to biodiversity, evaluate ecosystem services, and implement restoration.

## Course Content

### Module - I Foundations of Ecology
* Definition, Historic development in ecological sciences, Level of ecological organization, Speciation, Ecological niche, Geographic Ecology- Distribution of organisms, factors influencing geographic patterns and importance of Biogeography, Biological invasions

### Module - II Population Dynamics
* Characteristics of population, concept of carrying capacity, population growth and regulations, population fluctuations, dispersion and metapopulation, concept of r & k species; key stone species community ecology. Abundance in time and space, factors influencing growth and decline, Population regulation and balance of nature

### Module - III Community Dynamics
* Community Dynamics: Succession and biodiversity, Food Webs and trophic interactions, Disturbance ecology and resilience. Species Interaction: Negative interactions (competition, predation, parasitism), Positive interactions (mutualism, commensalism), Implications for community structure and stability

### Module - IV Ecosystem Functioning
* Ecosystem Ecology: energy flows and production, Nutrient cycling and biogeochemical processes, Landscape ecology and connectivity. Harvesting populations and Pest control: Sustainable harvesting practices, Pest control strategies and ecological impacts, Balancing human needs with ecosystem health.

### Module - V Applied Ecology and Conservation
* Principles of conservation biology, Threats to biodiversity. Ecosystem services, Ecosystem Health and Human Impact, Human Impacts on ecosystem and conservation biology, Restoration ecology, Real world examples of ecological principles in action, Case studies in ecosystem management and restoration, Integrating ecological knowledge into decision making processes

## References
1. Molles, Manuel C., and Teresa Tibbets. Ecology: concepts and applications. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
2. Begon, Michael, Martin Mortimer, and David J. Thompson. Population ecology: a unified study of animals and plants. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
3. Verhoef, Herman A., and Peter J. Morin, eds. Community ecology: processes, models, and applications. Oxford University Press, 2010.
4. Raffaelli, David G., and Christopher LJ Frid, eds. Ecosystem ecology: a new synthesis. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
5. Van Dyke, Fred. Conservation biology: foundations, concepts, applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008.