---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "cst332"
course_title: "foundations-of-security-in-computing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST332: Foundations of Security in Computing

## Course Objectives
* Illustrate the operations and properties of algebraic structures, integer arithmetic and modular arithmetic.
* Use the concepts of prime numbers and factorization for ensuring security in computing systems.
* Illustrate the concepts of linear congruence, primitive roots, discrete logarithms and elliptic curve arithmetic.
* Summarize the threats and attacks related to computer and program security.
* Outline the key aspects of operating system and database security.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 (Modular Arithmetic)
* Integer arithmetic - Integer division, Divisibility, Greatest Common Divisor (GCD), Euclid's algorithm for GCD, Extended Euclid’s algorithm, Linear Diophantine Equations.
* Modular arithmetic - Operations, Properties.
* Algebraic structures - Groups, Rings, Fields, Finite fields, GF(p), GF(2ⁿ).

### Module - 2 (Prime Numbers and Factorization)
* Prime numbers - Prime numbers and prime-power factorization, Fermat and Mersenne primes.
* Fermat’s theorem, Applications, Euler’s theorem, Euler’s totient function, Applications.
* Primality testing – Deterministic algorithms and Probabilistic algorithms.
* Factorization - Fermat’s factorization, Pollard p-1 method.

### Module - 3 (Linear Congruence, Primitive Roots and Elliptic Curve Arithmetic)
* Linear congruence - Simultaneous linear congruence, Chinese Remainder Theorem (CRT).
* Congruence with a prime - Power modulus, Arithmetic modulo p, Pseudoprimes and Carmichael numbers, Solving congruence modulo prime powers.
* Primitive roots - Existence of primitive roots for primes, Discrete logarithms.
* Elliptic curve arithmetic – Prime curves, Binary curves, Addition of two points, Multiplication of a point by a constant.

### Module - 4 (Computer and Program Security)
* Introduction to computer security – Threats, Vulnerabilities, Controls.
* Browser attack types, Web attacks targeting users, Email attack types.
* Introduction to program security - Non-malicious programming oversights, Malware.

### Module - 5 (Operating System and Database Security)
* Operating system security – Security in operating system, Security in design of operating system.
* Database security – Security requirements of databases, Reliability and integrity, Database disclosure.

## References
* Behrouz A. Forouzan, *Cryptography and Network Security*, 3/e, Tata McGraw-Hill.
* Charles P. Pfleeger, Shari Lawrence Pfleeger, Jonathan Margulies, *Security in Computing*, 5/e, Prentice Hall.
* G.A. Jones & J.M. Jones, *Elementary Number Theory*, Springer UTM, 2007.
* William Stallings, *Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practices*, 4/e, Pearson Education.
