---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "sw1431"
course_title: "management-for-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1431: Management for Social Work

## Course Objectives
* To acquire knowledge on management theory and to foster skills for administering Human Resources in an organisation.
* To make use of management principles for accomplishing social service programmes effectively and efficiently.
* Enable students to understand budgeting, organise, measure and management policy documents on the functioning of an Organisations and for preparing reports to Stakeholders.

## Course Content
### Module I - Introduction to Management
* Management: Definitions, Characteristics
* Management as an Art and Science; Basic Functions and Principles of Management – (Henri Fayol’s 14 Principles of Management)
* Scientific Management: Definition, Characteristics (Tylor)

### Module II - Types and Levels of Management
* Different Types of Management- Human Resource Management, Operational Management, Marketing Management, Procure Management, Financial Management and Strategic Management
* Public Relations and Customer Management
* Levels of Management/ Managers: Front Line / Supervisory Management; Middle Level Management and Top Level management  

### Module III - Organisational Behaviour
* The Factors that Influence the Organizations: People, Structure, Technology, Environment and Policy
* Organization Behavior: Definition, Nature and Relevance
* Models of OB: Autocratic, Supportive Model, Collegial and SOBC (Stimulus Organism- Behaviour- Consequence)
* Employee Motivation: Definition, Importance in work place; Types of Motivators: Monetary and Non-monetary 

### Module IV - Fundamentals of HR Management
* Personnel Management and Human Resource Management; Functions of Human Resource Manager: Recruitment, Selection (selection Process), Wage and Salary Management, Training, Performance Appraisal
* Training: Definition, Purpose and Training Management; Organizing Training Programmes- things to be considered (checklists). Types of Training
* Wage and Salary Administration: Definition and Components
* Performance Appraisal – Modern and Traditional Methods of PA- MBO
* Exit Interview: Concept and Significance 

### Module V - Fundamentals of Financial Management
* Finance Management – Concept And Process; Budgeting: Types and Components of Budget; Accounting: Meaning and Principles
* Financial Auditing: Definition, Characteristics and Types of Financial Auditing 

## References
1. Gitlow, H. (2009). A guide to lean six sigma management skills. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
2. Principles and Practice of Management – 2001: L. M Prasad.
3. Essentials of Management – 2000 – Koontz Herold.
4. Financial management – 2003 Pande M.
5. Project preparation, Appraisal, Budgeing and Implementation: Chandra Prasanna.
6. Personnel Management: Tripathi PC.
7. Management of human services and programmes: Lewis Judith.