---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "sw1441"
course_title: "health-care-and-health-administration"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1441: Health Care and Health Administration 

## Course Objectives
* To understand the concept of health as biological and psychological wellbeing.
* To understand health care planning.
* To know the information regarding common diseases and psychiatric disorders.
* To understand the organization of Health care system in India and its challenges.
* To understand the various health-related legislations.

## Course Content
### Module I - Health & Ill Health
* Concept of Health and Ill Health, Determinants of Health
* Major Indicators of Health Status: Morbidity and Mortality - Spectrum of Holistic Health - Concept of Hygiene
* Pollution and Sanitation
* SDGs and Health
* Patient as a Person

### Module II - Community Health and Health Care Planning
* Community Health: Concept and Various Components - Concepts: Public Health & Occupational Health
* Health Planning: Concept - Planning Cycle, Management Techniques and Methods
* Health Education  

### Module III - Major Diseases
* Communicable: TB, HIV; Non-Communicable/Lifestyle Diseases: Coronary Artery Disease and Stroke, Diabetes
* Role of National Health Mission
* AYUSH
* Application of Social Work Methods in Medical Setting

### Module IV - Major Psychiatric Disorders
* Mental Health: Depressive Disorder, Bi-polar Disorder, Schizophrenia: Anti-Social Personality Disorder
* DMHP: Objectives And Role in Community Psychiatry
* Application of Social Work Methods in Mental Health

### Module V - Organization of Health Care Services
* National Health Policy
* Organization of Health Services at the Central, State and Local levels
* Directorate of Health Services and Family Welfare Department
* Some Acts Concerning Health:
  1. Factories Act
  2. Shops and Commercial Establishments Act
  3. Workmen’s Compensation Act, ESI Act
  4. Mental Health Act 1987
  5. MTP 1972

## References
1. K. Park. (2015). *Essentials of Community Health Nursing*. New Delhi: Bhanot Publishers.
2. J E. Park. (2017). *Park’s Textbook of Preventive and Social Medicine* (23<sup>rd</sup>Edn). New Delhi: Bhanot Publishers.
3. Jerard, S. A. & Gabriel, M. (2011). *Health and Social Work Practices: New Frontiers and Challenges. India*: Authors Press.

### Online References
1. Health and Illness: https://www.aihw.gov.au/getmedia/fc2c053f-7707-437e-90b3-227818bba0a5/1_1-health-illness.pdf.aspx
2. Achieving Good Health: http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/hygiene/settings/hvchap2.pdf
3. Global health indicators: http://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_health_statistics/EN_WHS2015_Part2.pdf
4. Health, Hygiene and Diseases http://old.nios.ac.in/secscicour/CHAP