---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "sw1444"
course_title: "statistics-for-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1444: Statistics for Social Work 

## Course Objectives
1. To induct the students in the fields of Statistics.
2. To familiarize the basic components of Statistical measures.
3. Make the students to realize the relationship between Social Work Research and Statistics.
4. To impart knowledge about statistical applications in Research Methodology.

## Course Content
### Module I - Statistics
* Statistics: Meaning, Definition, Characteristics, Merits and Demerits
* Use of Statistics in Social Work Research

### Module II - Variables and Levels of Measurement
* Variables: Meaning and types of Variables: Dependent Variable –Independent variable-Quantitative variables and Attributes
* Levels of Measurement: Nominal, Ordinal, Interval and Ratio 

### Module III - Data Processing and Tabulation
* Editing: Meaning and Types of Editing
* Coding: Meaning and Types of Coding
* Master sheet Preparation –Prepare a Master sheet based on a Survey Schedule
* Features of Classification: Individual series, Discrete Series, Continuous Series
* Tabulation: Essential Parts of Tables, Types of Tables: One- way Table, Two- way Table

### Module IV - Descriptive Statistics
* Descriptive statistics: Concept and Meaning
* Presentation of Data in terms of Diagrams and Graphs: Pie Diagram, Bar diagrams, istograms, Cartograms, Ogives
* Measures of Central Tendency-Meaning and definition of Arithmetic Mean, Median and ModeArithmetic Calculation: Arithmetic Mean, Median and Mode-Use and Characteristics of Mean Median and Mode- Merits and Demerits of Mean Median and Mode
* Measures of Dispersion-Meaning and Definition of Range, Mean Deviation, Quartile Deviation and Standard Deviation - Arithmetic Calculation: Range, Mean Deviation, Quartile Deviation, Standard Deviation-Merits and Demerits of dispersion

### Module V - Inferential Statistics
* Inferential Statistics: Parametric and Non Parametric Tests-T test, One way - ANOVA, Correlation, Chi- square Test
* Regression: Meaning and Uses
* Use of various computer assisted software for statistical Analysis in Social Work Research

## References
1. Agarwal. Y.P. 1998. Statistical Methods Concepts Applications and computation. New Delhi. Sterling Publishes Pvt. Ltd.
2. Gaur, Ajai S and Sanjaya S Saur. 2009. Statistical Methods for Practice and Research. A guide to Data Analysis using SPSS. Sage Publications. New Delhi.
3. Gupta, S. P. 2009. Statistical Methods. New Delhi. Sultan Chand and Sons.
4. Foster, J.J. 1998. Data Analysis Using SPSS for Windows. Sage Publications Ltd. London.
5. Nagar, A.L, Basic Statistics, Oxford, University Press, 2004.
6. Cramer Duncan, (1999). Fundamental Statistics for Social Research: Step-by-Step Calculations and Computer Techniques using SPSS for Windows, New York: Routledge.
7. Earl Babbie, (1998) Adventures in Social research using SPSS. New Delhi : Pine.