---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "6"
course_code: "aot312"
course_title: "elastic-analysis-of-plates-and-shells"
language: "english"
contributor: "@9sreerag7"
---

# AOT312: Elastic Analysis of Plates and Shells

## Course Objective

- Apply differential equations for the calculation of response of two-dimensional problems.
- Understand the behavior of plates and analytical techniques.
- Construct the mathematical models of structural systems.
- Solve the two-dimensional structural engineering problems.
- Understand the bending theories of cylindrical shells with and without edge beams.

## Course Content

### Module 1
- Governing differential equations of thin rectangular plates with various boundary conditions (fixed, clamped, simply supported, etc.)
- Loadings: distributed loads, shear loads, pressure loads

### Module 2
- Bending of long thin rectangular plate to a cylindrical surface
- Kirchhoff plate theory
- Introduction to orthotropic plates
- Plate with hole

### Module 3
- Circular plates with various boundary conditions (fixed, clamped, simply supported, etc.)
- Loadings: distributed loads, shear loads, pressure loads
- Numerical methods for solution of plates: Navier's and Levy’s solutions

### Module 4
- General shell geometry and classifications
- Stress resultants and equilibrium equation
- Membrane theory for family of shells: parabolic, catenary, cycloid, circular, hyperbolic

### Module 5
- Classical bending theories of cylindrical shells with and without edge beams
- Approximate analysis of cylindrical shells
- Shorer’s differential equation for cylindrical shell

## References

- *Timoshenko, S., & Woinowsky-Krieger, S. (1959). Theory of Plates and Shells (Vol. 2, p. 120). McGraw-Hill.*
- *Szilard, R. (1974). Theory and Analysis of Plates.*
- *Novozhilov, V. V. (1959). The Theory of Thin Shells. P. Noordhoff.*
- *Ramaswamy, G. S. (1968). Design and Construction of Concrete Shell Roofs. McGraw-Hill.*
- *Chandrashekhara, K. (2001). Theory of Plates. Universities Press.*
