---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cst446"
course_title: "data-compression-techniques"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST446: Data Compression Techniques  

## Course Objectives  
* Describe the fundamental principles of data compression.  
* Apply statistical and dictionary-based compression techniques for various applications.  
* Illustrate various image compression standards.  
* Summarize video compression mechanisms to reduce redundancy in video.  
* Use the fundamental properties of digital audio to compress audio data.  

## Modules  

### Module 1 – Modelling and Types of Compression  
* Introduction to compression techniques – Lossy and lossless compression.  
* Measures of performance, modelling and coding.  
* Mathematical modelling for lossless and lossy compression – Physical models and probability models.  

### Module 2 – Basic Compression Methods  
* Basic compression techniques – Run Length Encoding (RLE), RLE text compression.  
* Statistical methods – Prefix codes, binary Huffman coding, non-binary Huffman algorithms, arithmetic coding.  

### Module 3 – Text & Image Compression  
* Dictionary-based coding – LZ77, LZ78 and LZW compression.  
* Image compression – Image standards, JPEG image compression (Baseline JPEG, JPEG-LS).  

### Module 4 – Video Compression  
* Video compression – Analog and digital video, motion compensation.  
* MPEG standards – MPEG 1, MPEG 4.  

### Module 5 – Audio Compression  
* Audio compression – Basics of digital audio.  
* Basic audio compression techniques.  
* MPEG audio compression – Layer 1, Layer 2, and Layer 3 coding.  

## References  
* David Solomon – *Data Compression: The Complete Reference*, 4th Ed., Springer, 2007.  
* Khalid Sayood – *Introduction to Data Compression*, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2003.  
* Stephen Welstead – *Fractal and Wavelet Image Compression Techniques*, PHI, 1999.  
* Sleinreitz – *Multimedia Systems*, Addison Wesley.  
* Mark Nelson and Jean-loup Gailly – *The Data Compression Book*, M&T Books.  
