---
country: "India"
university: "KTU"
branch: "CSE"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "CSD416"
course_title: "Project Phase II"
language: "English"
contributor: "@arjun-ms"
---

<!--  need to recheck this again -->

# CSD416: Project Phase II

## Course Objectives
* To apply engineering knowledge in practical problem solving.
* To foster innovation in design of products, processes or systems.
* To develop creative thinking in finding viable solutions to engineering problems.

## Course Content
### Phase 2 Targets
* In-depth study of the topic assigned in the light of the report prepared under Phase - I.
* Review and finalization of the approach to the problem relating to the assigned topic.
* Preparing a detailed action plan for conducting the investigation, including teamwork.
* Detailed Analysis/ Modeling / Simulation/ Design/ Problem Solving/Experiment as needed.
* Final development of product/ process, testing, results, conclusions and future directions.
* Preparing a paper for Conference Presentation/ Publication in Journals, if possible.
* Presenting projects in Project Expos conducted by the University at the cluster level and/or state level as well as others conducted in India and abroad.
* Filing Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) if applicable.
* Preparing a report in the standard format for being evaluated by the Department Assessment Board.
* Final project presentation and viva voce by the assessment board including the external expert.

### Evaluation Guidelines & Rubrics
* **Total Marks:** 150 (Minimum required to pass: 75 marks).
* **Project progress evaluation by guide:** 30 Marks.
* **Two interim evaluations by the Evaluation Committee:** 50 Marks (25 marks for each evaluation).
* **Final evaluation by the Final Evaluation committee:** 40 Marks.
* **Quality of the report evaluated by the evaluation committee:** 30 Marks.

#### Evaluation by the Guide (30 Marks) 
* Project Scheduling & Distribution of Work among Team members: 5 Marks.
* Literature survey: 4 Marks.
* Student's Diary/ Daily Log: 7 Marks.
* Individual Contribution: 9 Marks.
* Completion of the project: 5 Marks.

#### Evaluation Rubrics for Project Phase II: Interim Evaluation - 1 (Total Marks: 25) 
* Novelty of idea, and Implementation scope [CO5] [Group Evaluation]: 5 Marks.
* Effectiveness of task distribution among team members. [CO3] [Group Evaluation]: 5 Marks.
* Adherence to project schedule. [CO4] [Group Evaluation]: 5 Marks.
* Interim Results. [CO6] [Group assessment]: 5 Marks.
* Presentation [Individual assessment]: 5 Marks.

#### Evaluation Rubrics for Project Phase II: Interim Evaluation – 2 (Total Marks: 25) 
* Application of engineering knowledge [CO1] [Individual Assessment]: 10 Marks.
* Involvement of individual members [CO3] [Individual Assessment]: 5 Marks.
* Results and inferences upon execution [CO5] [Group Assessment]: 5 Marks.
* Documentation and presentation. [CO6] [Individual assessment]: 5 Marks.

#### Evaluation Rubrics for Project Phase II: Final Evaluation (Total Marks: 40) 
* Engineering knowledge. [CO1] [Group Assessment]: 10 Marks.
* Relevance of the project with respect to societal and/or industrial needs. [CO2] [Group Assessment]: 5 Marks.
* Innovation/novelty / Creativity [CO5] [Group Assessment]: 5 Marks.
* Quality of results / conclusions / solutions. [CO1] [Group Assessment]: 10 Marks.
* Presentation - Part I Preparation of slides. [CO6] [Group Assessment]: 5 Marks.
* Presentation - Part II: Individual Communication [CO6] [Individual Assessment]: 5 Marks.

#### Evaluation Rubrics for Project Phase II: Report Evaluation (Total Marks: 30) 
* Report [CO6]: 30 Marks.

## References
