---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "pecet416"
course_title: "engineering-geology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# PECET416: ENGINEERING GEOLOGY

## Course Objectives
- To provide the basics knowledge of Geology that is required for constructing various Civil Engineering Structures - surface changes, earth materials, etc..
- To focus on the core activities of engineering geologists – geologic hazard identification and mitigation, ground water problems, geological structures, and planning and construction of major Civil Engineering projects.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1
- **Relevance of Geology in Civil Engineering:** Branches of Geology. Surface Processes of the earth: Weathering - Types of weathering, Products of weathering. Geological processes by rivers. Geological work by Sea waves.

### Module 2
- **Rocks:** Minerals and Rocks, Engineering Properties and Classification of Rock Masses, Engineering Classification of Rock Masses.
- **Geomorphic Processes and Landforms:** Crustal Deformation and Geological Structures.

### Module 3
- **Site Investigations:** Site Investigations and Ground Improvement.
- **Hydrogeology:** Ground water problems.

### Module 4
- **Geological Hazards:** Earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, debris flows, tsunamis, and floods.
- **Engineering Applications:** Engineering Geology in Dam Construction, Engineering Geology in Tunneling Practice.

---

## References

- S. K. Duggal, H. K. Pandey, N. Rawat, *Engineering Geology*, McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited, 1st Edition, 2016.  
- D. Venkat Reddy, *Engineering Geology*, Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., 2nd Edition, 2016.  
- N. Chenna Kesavulu, *Textbook of Engineering Geology*, Macmillan India Limited, 2nd Edition, 2009.  
- B. S. Sathya Narayanaswami, *Engineering Geology*, Dhanpat Rai & Co., 1st Edition, 2000.  
- Parbin Singh, *Engineering and General Geology*, S. K. Kataria & Sons, 8th Edition, 2008.  
- K. V. G. K. Gokhale, *Principles of Engineering Geology*, BSP Books, 1st Edition, 2019.  
- Subinoy Gangopadhyay, *Engineering Geology*, Oxford University Press, 1st Edition, 2013.
- Arthur Holmes, *Principles of Physical Geology*, Springer, 4th Edition, 1993.  
- William E. Ford, *Dana’s Textbook of Mineralogy*, CBS, 4th Edition, 2006.  
- C. D. Gribble, *Rutley’s Elements of Mineralogy*, CBS, 27th Edition, 2005.  
- G. W. Tyrrell, *The Principles of Petrology*, Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.  
- Loren A. Raymond, *Petrology: The Study of Igneous, Sedimentary and Metamorphic Rocks*, Waveland Press Inc., 2nd Edition, 2007.  
- David Keith Todd, Larry W. Mays, *Groundwater Hydrology*, Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., 3rd Edition, 2011.  
- Marland P. Billings, *Structural Geology*, Pearson Education, 3rd Edition.
