---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "sw1343"
course_title: "geriatric-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1343: Geriatric Social Work

## Course Objectives
* To understand the concepts related to Social Gerontology.
* To familiarise with perspectives in gerontology and geriatric social work.
* To enable the students to intervene the problems of elderly.
* To make the students to aware about the programmes for the welfare of elderly.

## Course Content
### Module I -  Social Gerontology
* Social Gerontology: Meaning, Definition, Characteristics
* Basic Concepts : Elderly, Old Age, Ageing, Ageism, and Senior Citizens
* Nature : Physical, Social and Emotional aspects of Ageing
* Demographic Characteristics of Ageing in India and Kerala

### Module II - Problems of Ageing
* Soci-Economic Problems: Family Living , Retirement and Dependency
* Psychological Problems : Isolation, Alienation, Depression, Social Insecurity, Maladjustment, fear of death, lack of love and affection
* Cultural Problems : Changing Cultural Practices, Values and Morals
* Health Problems: Physical Impairment, age related morbidity patterns
* Elderly Abuse : Exploitation, Inequality 

### Module III - Geriatric Social Work
* Geriatrics : Meaning and Definition, Need and Significance
* Social Dimensions of Geriatric Care
* Role of Social Worker in the geriatric care for elderly
* Agencies of Geriatric care: Govt, NGOs, Voluntary Organizations
* Components of family assessment-Providing solutions to - care - giver burden common problems addressed in psychotherapy, with the elderly 

### Module IV - Perspectives on Ageing 
* Biological Theories of Ageing: Immunization Theory, mutation theory, Age Clock Theory
* Social Theories of Ageing: Disengagement and Activity Theories, and Dependency Theory
* Psychological Theories of Ageing: Theory of Loneliness and Isolation and theory of Alienation

### Module V - Programmes and Policies for Elderly
* Programmes for Elderly : Annapoorna, Anthyothaya
* Old Age Policies: NPOP, National Old Age Pension Scheme
* Social and vocational rehabilitation Policy, programme and services available for elderly
* Community based programmes

## References
1. Chowdhari Paul: Ageing and the Aged, New Delhi, 1992.
2. Dandekar Kumudini: Elderly in India, New Delhi, 1986.
3. Desai KG : Ageing in India, Bombay 1982.
4. Kahandpur KL, Senior Citizens in India, Bombay, 1992.
5. Nair TK: Community Care of the Elderly: a study of Family and community Based Services in Madars, Ramana KV, Visakhapatanam.
6. Manikkarasa Devakumar & Ninan Kurian: Dementia in Developing World, Alzheimer’s & Related Disorders Society of India, Kunnamkulam, 1998.
7. Bellak Leopol: Geriatric Psychiatry, A handbook for psychiatrics and Primary.
8. Karasu Toksoz B : Care Physicians.
9. Chowdhary Paul D: Aging and Aged: A source Book.
10. Cox Enid O: Empowerment Oriented Social work.
11. Parsons Ruth J : Practice with the Elderly.