---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "sw1344"
course_title: "social-work-administration"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1344: Social Work Administration

## Course Objectives
* To acquire knowledge and skills to administer the HSO.
* To become informed about the different kinds of social welfare programme available at the governmental and NGO levels for clients to take advantage of.
* To become familiar with the legislation covering different aspects of HSO functioning.
* To become familiar with the process of initiating social service programmes.
* Being able to formulate the different policy documents concerning the functioning of the HSO and preparing reports to the different stakeholders.

## Course Content
### Module I -  Administration
* Administration –Meaning, Definition, Types and Scope
* Social Welfare Administration
* Social Work Administration, Human Service Organization
* Principles of Human Service Administration
* Functions of Social Work Administration
* Social Welfare Administration; as a Method of Social Work

### Module II - Administrative Process
* Planning-Definition, Importance, Steps in Planning, Types and Limitations of Planning
* Organising- Definition, Importance, Principles, and Steps.
* Staffing-Definition, Importance, Steps
* Directing-Definition, Importance and Elements of Direction – Supervision, Motivation, Leadership, Communication
* Co-ordinating- Definition, Importance, Principles, Steps and Techniques
* Reporting: Definition, Importance, Principles, Types and Steps
* Budgeting. Definition, Importance, Sources of Budget, Principles and Types 

### Module III - Registration of Organisations
* Registration of Organizations: Advantages of Registering, Acts for Registering Organizations-Society, Trust, Company’s Act, Cooperatives Act. Registration under Societies Registration Act
* Drawing up of MoA-Constitution and Bye-laws of HSO. - Board, Functions, Types of Members, Qualifications, Committee, Types of Committees, Sub-committees, – Holding meetings of the Statutory Bodies, keeping minutes, filing returns, sending timely reports

### Module IV - Finance and Office Management 
* Resource Mobilization, Budgeting – FCRA and its Implications-Tax Obligations
* Office Management: Principles and Practices, Maintenance of Files, Records, Data banks- MIS.
* Basics of Materials Management like Purchase Procedure, Inventory Control 

### Module V - Welfare Programmes Marginalized Communities
* Welfare Programmes for Women, Children, Youth, Aged, Destitute and Differently Abled (institutional and non-institutional)
* Social Welfare Programmes for SCs & STs
* Social Welfare Administration in India – Structure, Functions and Programmes. CSWB, Social Welfare Advisory Board

## References
1. Kotler, Philip Roberto (1989) *Social Marketing strategies for changing public behaviour*, New York, Free Press.
2. Woodside Marianne (1990) *Introduction to Human Services*, Brooks Cole pub.Com.
3. Prasad Rameshwar (1982) *Social Administration*, Shree Publishing House.
4. Sachdeva D.R (1995) *Social Welfare Administration in India*, New Delhi: Kitab Mahal.
5. Chowdhary, P. D. (2000). *Social welfare administration*. New Delhi; Atma Ram & sons.
6. Goel S.L., Jain R.K.,(1998) social Welfare Administration Vol. 1 and 2: Theory and Practice, Deep & Deep Publication.
7. Kohli A.S., Sharma S.R., Encyclopaedia of Social Welfare and Administration Vol.1-7 Anmol Publication Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1996.
8. Koontz, Harold and Heinz Weihrich. *Essentials of Management*. New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited, 2000.
9. Lewis Judith ., management of human Services, Programs, Books Cole Publishing Co., 19991
10. Vidya Rao (1987) *Social Welfare Administration*, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Bombay
11. Mclunis-Dittrich, Kathlee (1994). *Integrating Social Welfare Policy and Social Work Practice*. New York: Brooks/Cole.
