---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht434"
course_title: "computational-fluid-dynamics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT434: Computational Fluid Dynamics

## Course Objectives

- Describe basic CFD concepts and procedure of CFD solution
- Apply knowledge of basic science and engineering fundamentals to solve practical problems
- Solve the governing equations for fluid flow numerically.
- Implement grid generation, assess stability and conduct a grid convergence assessment.
- Apply turbulence models to engineering fluid flow problems.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction (8 Hrs.)

- **Introduction:** Need of CFD as an analysis tool, comparison of experimental, theoretical and computational approaches, Applications – automobile, environmental engineering, chemical engineering, CFD software packages and tools. CFD solution procedure: pre-processing, numerical solution – CFD solver, post processing.
- **Ordinary and partial differential equations:** Classification of partial differential equations (PDE): physical classification – equilibrium and marching problems; mathematical classification – hyperbolic, parabolic and elliptic PDEs, well posed problems.

### Module - 2: Review of governing equations

- Review of governing equations: Continuity equation, Momentum equation, Energy equation, Navier – Stokes equation, generic form of governing equations, boundary conditions - types of boundary conditions: Neumann, Dirichlet, Robin, mixed boundary condition. Turbulence modelling – k-ε turbulence model.

### Module - 3: Basic concepts of CFD

- Basic concepts of CFD: Introduction to discretization, Finite difference approximation of a derivative, discretization of differential equations using finite differences, consistency, convergence and stability (concepts alone), concept of explicit and implicit methods, Crank Nicholson scheme (FTCS only).

### Module - 4: Finite volume discretization

- **Finite Volume Discretization:** Diffusion problem, convection-diffusion problem, properties of discretization schemes – conservativeness, boundedness, transportiveness.
- **Solution to discretized equations:** TDMA, Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel, Gauss elimination methods.

### Module - 5: Detailed study of Navier-Stokes Equation (7 Hrs.)

- **Detailed study of Navier stokes Equation:** Solution of the Navier Stokes Equations-Discretization of convective, viscous, pressure and body force terms-conservation properties-grid arrangement colocated and staggered pressure equation and its solutions—implicit and explicit methods-implicit pressure correction methods-Fractional Step method-SIMPLE algorithm for a colocated Variable arrangement.
- **Grid generation:** Structured and unstructured grid, grid spacing, Cartesian and curvilinear grids, grid independence, hybrid grid.

## References

- John C Tannehill, D A Anderson, R H Pletcher, _Computational fluid Mechanics and Heat transfer_, Taylor & Francis Publishers.
- John D Anderson, _Computational Fluid Dynamics – The basics with applications_, Mc GrawHill.
- H Versteeg, M Malasekara, _An introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics_, Pearson.
- Vivek V. Ranade, _Computational Fluid Dynamics for Reactor Engineering_ De Gruyter, 1995.
- K Muralidhar and Sundararajan, _Computational Fluid flow and Heat transfer_
- Suhas V Patankar, _Numerical heat transfer and fluid flow_.
- Pradeep Niyogi, S K Chakrabarthy, M K Laha, Pearson, _Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics_
- Gautam Biswas, Somenath Mukherjee, Narosa, _Computational Fluid Dynamics_
- Sreenivas Jayanti, _Computational fluid dynamics for Engineers and Scientists_, Springer.
