---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht454"
course_title: "process-utility-and-piping-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT454: Process Utility and Piping Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Identify and describe the major types, processes and associated equipments of utility systems employed in industries.
- Compute the power rating of equipments and select the rating of instruments and process auxiliaries.
- Perform mathematical calculations involved in steam generation, psychrometry and refrigeration operations.
- Select the relevant pipes for various chemical processes and state piping colour code for a given process fluid.
- Identify different types of pipes, joints, fittings and related accessories used in process plants.
- Choose relevant insulation material for piping systems.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Process Utility Systems and Water Treatment (5 Hours)

- **Process Utility Systems:** Classification of process utility systems, Importance of process utilities in chemical industries and plants.
- **Water as a utility in process industries:** Sources of water, hard and soft water, requisites of industrial water and its uses, methods of water treatment, storage and distribution of water, recycle and conservation of water.
- **Cooling Tower:** Types and performance evaluation.

### Module - 2: Fuels and Compressed Air Systems (6 Hours)

- **Fuels:** Introduction to Fuels, Properties of Fuel oil, Coal and Gas, Storage, handling and preparation of fuels, Principles of Combustion, Combustion of Oil, Coal and Gas.
- **Compressed air system:** Types of air compressors, Compressor efficiency, Efficient compressor operation, Compressed air system components, Capacity assessment, Leakage test, Factors affecting the performance and efficiency of compressors.
- **Vacuum Pumps:** Types of vacuum pumps and their performance characteristics.

### Module - 3: Steam Systems and Waste Heat Recovery (8 Hours)

- **Steam System:** Steam and its importance, Properties of steam, Problems based on enthalpy calculation for wet steam, dry saturated steam and superheated steam.
- **Boilers:** Types of steam generators/boilers, Combustion in boilers, Performance evaluation, Analysis of losses, Feed water treatment, Blow down, Energy conservation opportunities, Boilers Act.
- **Steam handling and distribution:** Steam distribution system, Assessment of steam distribution losses, Steam economy, Steam traps, Condensate and flash steam recovery system, Identifying opportunities for energy savings.
- **Waste Heat Recovery:** Classification, Advantages and applications, commercially viable waste heat recovery devices, Saving potential.

### Module - 4: Refrigeration and Ventilation (6 Hours)

- **Refrigeration and Ventilation:** Principles of refrigeration, vapour compression and vapour absorption refrigeration cycles, types of refrigerants and their importance. Production of cryogenic temperatures.
- **Air-water systems:** Characteristics of Air-water systems. Humidification and Dehumidification equipments. Exhaust & Ventilation.

### Module - 5: Piping Engineering (10 Hours)

- **Introduction to Piping:** Classification of pipes, pipe materials, pipe sizing, pipe wall thickness, schedule number, codes and standards. Piping colour codes as per types of fluid passing through pipes.
- **Piping Components:** Pipes, Fittings, Flanges, Gaskets, Bolting and Valves.
- **Pipe fittings:** Functions and properties, types of pipe fittings and their selection.
- **Gaskets:** Functions and properties, types of gaskets and their selection.
- **Valves:** Types of valves, selection criteria of valves for various systems.
- **Piping insulation:** Insulation materials, estimating thickness of insulation, critical thickness of insulation, optimal thickness of insulation.

## References

- Jack Broughton, _Process utility systems_, Institution of Chem. Engineers, U.K.
- M.S. Peters and Timmerhaus, _Plant design and Economics for Chemical Engineers_, Mc Graw Hill, 3rd Edition.
- Roger Hunt and Ed Bausbacher, _Process Plant layout and Piping Design_ PTR Prentice Hall Inc.
- F.C. Vibrandt and C.E. Dryden, _Chemical Engineering Plant Design_, McGraw Hill, Fifth Edition.
