---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht464"
course_title: "drugs-and-pharmaceuticals-technology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT464: Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Technology

## Course Objectives

- Explain principles of preformulations and basic formulation considerations for monophasic liquid orals and emulsions suspensions, suppositories and aerosols
- Describe preformulation, formulation and unit operation involved in the manufacturing of tablets
- Explain the coating polymers, technology and equipments used for coating of tablets and describe microencapsulation techniques
- Describe formulations for hard and soft gelatin capsules, machinery used for filling hard gelatin capsules, process for soft gelatin capsules manufacturing, evaluation of capsules
- Describe Preformulation, formulation, evaluation and large scale manufacturing, packaging of oral controlled release and sustained release products

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Pharmaceutical Industry and Chemical Conversions (6 hours)

- **Pharmaceutical Industry:** Drug discovery and Development of Drugs, Organic Therapeutic agents uses and Economics. Chemical Conversion Processes - Alkylation, Carboxylation, Condensation, Cyclisation, Dehydration, Esterification, Halogenation Oxidation, Sulfonation, Complex Chemical Conversions and Fermentation.
- **Preparation of pharmaceuticals:** Outlines of preparation, properties, uses and testing of the following pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals, sulfacetamide, paracetamol, methyl orange, riboflavin, nicotinamide, procaine hydrochloride, para-amino salicylic acid, isonicotinic acid hydrazide, aspirin, penicillin, calcium gluconate, ferric ammonium citrate

### Module - 2: Tablets, Coating and Capsules

- **Compressed Tablets:** Wet Granulation, Dry Granulation or Slugging, Direct Compression, Tablet Presses, Formulation.
- **Tablet coating:** Introduction to tablet coating: rationale, advantages etc. Preformulation considerations for tablet coating. Types of coating. Quality control of coated and uncoated tablets
- **Capsules:** Introduction to capsule dosage form: rationale, advantages etc. Preformulation considerations for capsule dosage form. Hard gelatin capsules: formulation considerations, capsule manufacture equipments, quality control tests, packaging. Soft gelatin capsules: formulation considerations, capsule filling equipments, quality control tests, packaging, Microencapsulation, Fabrication techniques, Evaluation

### Module - 3: Liquid Dosage Forms and Parenterals

- **Monophasics:** (Oral and Topicals)(solution, syrups, elixirs, linctus, nasal drops, ear drops, etc.), Preformulation, Formulation, Quality Control
- **Biphasic - Suspensions:** Preformulation. Principles and Stabilization techniques. Formulation Development. Evaluation. Large scale manufacture and packaging with focus on equipment
- **Biphasic - Emulsions:** Preformulation. Theories of emulsions. Formulation. Evaluation including stress testing. Large scale manufacture and packaging with focus one equipment
- **Parenteral preparations:** Large volume and small volume parenterals, Standard of Hygiene and Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), Packing techniques and quality control.

### Module - 4: Topical and Advanced Dosage Forms

- **Topical dosage forms:** Ointments – Preformulation, Formulation, Evaluation, Large scale manufacture and packaging with focus on equipment. Creams – Preformulation, Formulation, Evaluation, Large scale manufacture and packaging with focus on equipment. Gels – Preformulation, Formulation, Evaluation, Large scale manufacture and packaging with focus on equipment.
- **Suppositories:** Preformulation, Formulation, Evaluation, Large scale manufacturing with focus on equipment.
- **Aerosols:** Containers and Propellants, Formulation of aerosols, Evaluation of aerosols
- **Advanced formulations:** Oral sustained release and controlled release formulations – Preformulation, Formulation of matrix and reservoir type systems, Drug targeting: concepts, liposomes, nanoparticles, niosomes

### Module - 5: Sterilization and Analytical Methods (5 hours)

- **Sterilization:** Introduction, risk factor, methods of sterilization, heat (dry and moist), heating with bactericide, filtration, gaseous sterilization and radiation sterilization, suitable example to be discussed and sterilization testing.
- **Analytical Methods:** Tests for various Drugs & Pharmaceuticals- principle, instrumentation and applications of UV/VIS and IR spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction analysis, Fourier transform spectroscopy, chromatography principle and its types, fluorimetry, polarimetry.

## References

- Shayne Cox Gad. _Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Handbook_, Published by John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2008.
- Bernd Meibohm. _Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics of biotech drugs_, Published by Wiley-VCH, 2006.
- Rawlines, E.A.; _Bentleys Text book of Pharmaceutics_, III Edition, Bailliere Tindall, London, 1977.
- Remington-The Science and Practice of Pharmacy (Vol.1& 2)
- Pharmaceutical Production Facilities: Design & Applications, Graham C.Cole,1st Edition , 1990, Ellis Horwood
- Theory & Practice Of Industrial Pharmacy, Leon Lachman ,Herbert A.Lieberman& Joseph Kanig, 3rd edition, 1987, Lea &Febiger, Philadelphia
- ICH Guidelines 7 Coated Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms, K. H. Bauer, CRC Press, Boca Raton. Med Pharm.
- Pharmaceutical Coating Technology, G. C. Cole, New York, Ellis, Horwood, 1990
- Pulsed and Self-Regulated Drug Delivery, J. Kost, Florida, CRC Press, 1987
- Extended Release Dosage Forms, - KlowCzynski, Florida, CRC Press, 1987
- Hard Capsules: Development and Technology, K. Ridgway, London Pharmaceutical Press 1987
- Process Systems Engineering for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Volume 41, Edited by Ravendra Singh , Zhihong Yuan Tsinghua, Elsevier, 2018
- Pharmaceutical Suspensions from Formulation Development to Manufacturing, Edited by Alok K. Kulshreshtha, Onkar N. Singh, G. Michael Wall, Springer, 2010
