---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "mechanical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 3
course_code: "hut200"
course_title: "professional-ethics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AkhilaSunesh"
---

# HUT200: Professional Ethics  

## Course Objectives  
* Understand the core values that shape the ethical behaviour of a professional.  
* Adopt a good character and follow an ethical life.  
* Explain the role and responsibility in technological development by keeping personal and legal ethics.  
* Solve moral and ethical problems through exploration and assessment by established experiments.  
* Apply the knowledge of human values and social values to contemporary ethical values and global issues.  

## Course Contents

### Module 1 – Human Values  
* Morals, values and ethics.  
* Integrity, academic integrity, work ethics, service learning, civic virtue.  
* Respect for others, living peacefully, caring and sharing, honesty, courage, cooperation, commitment.  
* Empathy, self-confidence, social expectations.  

### Module 2 – Engineering Ethics & Professionalism  
* Senses of engineering ethics, variety of moral issues, types of inquiry, moral dilemmas, moral autonomy.  
* Kohlberg’s theory, Gilligan’s theory, consensus and controversy.  
* Profession and professionalism, models of professional roles.  
* Theories about right action, self-interest, customs and religion, uses of ethical theories.  

### Module 3 – Engineering as Social Experimentation  
* Engineering as experimentation, engineers as responsible experimenters, codes of ethics, plagiarism.  
* A balanced outlook on law, challenges, case study – Bhopal gas tragedy.  

### Module 4 – Responsibilities and Rights  
* Collegiality and loyalty, managing conflict, respect for authority, collective bargaining.  
* Confidentiality, role of confidentiality in moral integrity, conflicts of interest, occupational crime.  
* Professional rights, employee rights, intellectual property rights, discrimination.  

### Module 5 – Global Ethical Issues  
* Multinational corporations, environmental ethics, business ethics, computer ethics.  
* Role in technological development, engineers as managers, consulting engineers.  
* Engineers as expert witnesses and advisors, moral leadership.  

## References  
* M Govindarajan, S Natarajan, V S Senthil Kumar – *Engineering Ethics*, PHI Learning, 2012.  
* R S Naagarazan – *A Textbook on Professional Ethics and Human Values*, New Age International, 2006.  
* Mike W. Martin, Roland Schinzinger – *Ethics in Engineering*, 4th Ed., Tata McGraw Hill, 2014.  
* Charles D. Fleddermann – *Engineering Ethics*, Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2004.  
* Charles E. Harris, Michael S. Protchard, Michael J. Rabins – *Engineering Ethics: Concepts and Cases*, Wadsworth Thompson Learning, 2005.  
* [Human Values and Professional Ethics](http://www.slideword.org/slidestag.aspx/human-values-and-Professional-ethics)  
