---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht416"
course_title: "economics-and-management-of-chemical-industries"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT416: Economics and Management of Chemical Industries

## Course Objectives

- Apply the concept of time value of money, unacost, capitalized cost etc. for comparing projects of equal and unequal duration
- Understand the concept of depreciation and apply different methods for calculating depreciation in real life projects.
- Apply different techniques and tools for cost estimation of the projects
- Utilize different methods for calculating profitability for project selection and ranking
- Apply the concept of break even analysis for selecting / designing a project
- Understand the principle of accounting, prepare financial statements and analyse the financial status of the company

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Equivalence and cost comparisons (8 Hrs.)

- **Equivalence and cost comparisons:** Time value of money and equivalence, equations used in economic analysis, compound interest and continuous interest, unacost, capitalized cost, cost comparison with equal and unequal duration of service life.
- **Depreciation and taxes:** Nature of depreciation, methods of determining depreciation, straight line, declining balances, double declining balance, sum of years digits, sinking fund and units of production methods

### Module - 2: Cost estimation

- **Cost Estimation:** Cost indices, material cost indices, labour cost indices, William's six tenth factor, location index, types of cost estimates:- order of magnitude estimate, study estimate, preliminary estimate, definitive estimate, detailed estimate.
- **Techniques of cost estimates:** Conference techniques, comparison techniques graphic relationship, tabular relationship, unit rate techniques, lang factor method, hand factor method, Chilton method, miller method, Peter's and Timmerhaus ratio factor method, Items for capital cost estimates, product cost estimates, direct production cost, administration expenses, items for total product cost estimates, elements of complete costs, start up costs

### Module - 3: Profitability analysis

- Profitability analysis, mathematical methods for profitability evaluation, payout time, payout time with interest, return on average investment, Return on original investment, net present value, net present value index, DCF rate of return, incremental analysis.

### Module - 4: Breakeven and minimum cost analysis

- Breakeven and minimum cost analysis, variable cost and fixed cost, Break even analysis, economic production chart for 100% capacity, above 100% capacity and dumping, non-linear economic production chart, Inflation, unaburden.

### Module - 5: Principles of accounting

- Principles of accounting, accounting definition, trial balance, profit and loss accounts, balance sheet, financial ratios related to balance sheet and profit and loss account, canons of ethics of engineers.

## References

- Jelen F.C., _Cost and Optimisation Engineering_, McGraw Hill
- Peters &Timmerhaus, _Plant Design & Economics for Chemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill
- Davies G.S., _Process Engineering Economics_, Chem. Eng. Ed. Dev. Centre, IIT Madras
- Schweyer, _Process Engineering Economics_, McGraw Hill
- Tyler, _Chemical Engineering Cost Estimation_
- Aries & Newton, _Chemical Engineering & Cost Estimation_
- Happel, _Chemical Process Economics_, Marcel Decker
