---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 8
course_code: "cht446"
course_title: "composite-materials"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT446: Composite Materials

## Course Objectives

- Understand the properties, applications and different types of composite materials, their matrices, reinforcements and additives.
- Explain the manufacturing techniques of Polymer Matrix, Ceramic Matrix, Metal Matrix and Fibre Reinforced Composites.
- Analyse the theory and mechanism of composite materials for the selection of matrix and reinforcement materials.
- Explain the testing procedures of composite materials.
- Describe the properties and applications of advanced composites.
- Understand the environmental effects, in-service damage types and non-destructive inspection techniques of composites.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction to composite materials, constituents and classification (9 Hrs.)

Introduction to composite materials, Constituents of composite materials: Reinforcements, Matrix: glass, carbon, Kevlar, boron, asbestos, steel, natural fibres and whiskers-reinforcement fibres, Coupling agents, coatings & fillers, Characteristic features and applications. Classification of composite materials based on matrices and reinforcements- Polymer Matrix Composites - Metal Matrix Composites-Ceramic Matrix Composites-Plastic and Rubber Matrix Composites- Smart Composites-Carbon-Carbon Composites- Intermetallic Composites-Laminated Composites-Fibre reinforced composites-Laminar Composites -Particulate Composites.

### Module - 2: Manufacturing/Fabrication Techniques (7 Hrs.)

Manufacturing/Fabrication Techniques-Traditional and novel approaches process fundamentals. Polymer Matrix Composites- Fabrication of Fibres, Plastic Fibre Forms, Pre-pregs, Moulding Compounds- Processes, Lay-Ups, Filament Winding, Pultrusion, and Recycling. Ceramic Matrix Composites: Hot-Pressing, Infiltration, In Situ Chemical reaction Techniques, CVD, CVI, Sol-gel. Metal Matrix Composites- Liquid Infiltration, Casting, Solid State Processes, Diffusion Bonding and In Situ Technique. Fibre Reinforced Thermoplastics (FRTP) preparation- brief description of coating process- melt compounding process and dry blending process-injection moulding, rotational moulding and cold forming of reinforced thermoplastics.

### Module - 3: Composite Mechanics Theory (9 Hrs.)

Composite Mechanics Theory- basic criterion to be adopted in the selection of matrix and reinforcement-mechanics of composite materials-micromechanics and macro mechanics mechanism of load transfer-minimum and critical fibre content-critical fibre length-law of mixture rule-unidirectional and fibrous composites-effects of fibre orientation on stiffness and strength-bidirectional and random fibre composites-concepts of unit cell-stress analysis of unit cells-toughness of fibrous composites, microscopic stress-strain curves.

### Module - 4: Testing of composites materials (5 Hrs.)

Testing of composites materials and products for quality control- Brief outlines of testing of glass fibre, testing of resins-testing of products. Failure criteria, Laminate Strength, Stress Concentrations. Key damage mode for composites and composite damage tolerance capabilities. Typical in-service damage types for composites. Non-destructive inspection techniques for detecting damage in composites. Basic types of composite repair and their benefits.

### Module - 5: Advanced composite materials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications (5 Hrs.)

Advanced composite materials: Synthesis, Properties and Applications of Green Composites, Nanocomposites and Hybrid Composites. Environmental effects in Composites, Advantages and disadvantages of composites with respect to Product Lifecycle Management. General considerations and process involved in composite structural design.

## References

- G.Lubin, _Handbook of composites_, Van Nostrand, New York, 1982.
- G. Piatti, _Advances in composite materials_, (1978), Applied Science Publishers Ltd., London.
- D. Hull, _An Introduction to Composite Materials_, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
- Mohr.J.G.et al, _SPI handbook of Technology and Engineering of reinforced Plastics/Composites_, Von Nostrand, New York.
- P. M. Ajayan, L. S. Schadler, P. V. Braun, _Nanocomposite Science and Technology_, (2003), Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH Co. KGaA, Weinheim.
- V.V. Vasiliev and E.V. Morozov, _Mechanics and Analysis of Composite Materials_, (2001), Elsevier Science Ltd, The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 lGB, UK.
- K.K. Chawla, _Ceramic matrix composites_, 1st Ed., (1993) Chapman & Hall, London.
- K.K.Chawla, _Composite Materials_, 2nd Ed., (1987) Springer-Verlag, New York
- M.O.W. Richardson (Ed)_Polymer Engineering Composites_. Applied Science Publishers, London.
- Katz.H.S. & J.V. Milewski, _Handbook of Fillers and Reinforcement for plastics_- Von Nostrand, New York.
