---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "24-360-0202"
course_title: "environmental-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0202: ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING

## Course Objectives
* Environmental Engineering as a branch of engineering is concerned with protecting the environment from the potentially deleterious effects of human activity, protecting the human population from the adverse environmental factors, and improving environmental quality for human health and well being. The objective is to give the students an introduction to the basic principles of Environmental Engineering, the major related activities like wastewater treatment, public water supply, air pollution control and solid and hazardous waste management.


## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Explain the basic laws and the unit operations in chemical engineering applicable to environmental systems.
* **CO 2:** Identify the characteristics of water and the various methods or techniques adopted for purifying raw water.
* **CO 3:** Classify the techniques and the equipments used for the physical, physico-chemical and biological treatment of wastewater.
* **CO 4:** Examine the sources and types of air pollutants, the meteorological factors influencing the dispersion of air pollutants and the methods and equipments used for control of particulate matter and gaseous contaminants.
* **CO 5:** Identify the characteristics of municipal solid waste and hazardous wastes and the engineered systems used for the collection, transport, treatment and disposal of solid wastes and hazardous wastes.

## Course Content

### Module - I 
* Chemical Engineering - Units and Dimensions – Primary and secondary quantities, Conversion factors, Dimensionless equations and consistent units. Law of conservation of mass. Law of conservation of energy. Concept of material balance and energy balance. Molal units. Idealgas law. Unit operations and unit processes. Basic laws of heat, mass and momentum. Flow of fluids: nature of fluid, viscosity, velocity profile, flow field, types of fluid motion, laminar and turbulent flow, flow of a fluid past a solid surface. Reciprocating, rotary, and centrifugal pumps. Diffusion, mass transfer operation, absorption, Vapour-Liquid Equilibrium, Relative Volatility, Principle of distillation. An overview of the equipment of gas-liquid Operations. Mixing and agitation. Agitated vessels. Major types of agitators
* Graphical tools for Environmental Engineering: Representation of an object by plan, elevation and end view. Methods for pictorial representation of a process – Block flow diagrams (BFD), Process flow diagrams (PFD), Piping & Instrumentation diagram (P&ID). Symbols for the representation of equipment, piping and instruments


### Module - II 
* Fundamentals of Hydrology: The hydrologic cycle, Surface water hydrology – Precipitation, Stream flow, Surface runoff, Ground water hydrology – Water table (unconfined) aquifer, The hydrologic equation
* Public Water Supply: Sources of potable water, Water quality – Physical, Chemical and Microbiological Characteristics of water, Water quality standards, IS 10500: 2012. Methods adopted for purifying water for public water supply: Flow diagram of a surface water treatment plant, Principles of Screen, Coagulation and flocculation, Sedimentation, Filtration and Disinfection. Aeration of water. Softening of water. Demineralization of water. Water distribution systems. Requirements of water distribution systems. Arrangements for distribution pipes and accessories of water distribution. Sanitary sewer systems. Industrial waste water drains. Storm water drains

### Module - III 
* Water pollutants and their sources, Effect of oxygen-demanding wastes on rivers – Biochemical oxygen demand, Carbonaceous and nitrogenous BOD, DO sag curve, Streeter-Phelps equation. Effects of nutrients on water quality in rivers
* Water and Wastewater Treatment: Engineered systems for water and wastewater treatment. Variations in quality and quantity of wastewater. Volume reduction and flow equalization. Significance of primary, secondary and tertiary treatment. Primary treatment - Grit removal and screening. Chemical precipitation. Sedimentation - Flocculent settling, hindered settling and compression settling. Plain sedimentation and sedimentation aided with coagulation. Flocculation. Filtration - Gravity and pressure filtration. Dissolved air flotation. Secondary treatment- Suspended growth and attached growth aerobic and anaerobic processes. Aerobic processes for oxidation of carbonaceous matter Activated sludge process. Trickling filter and biofilter. Rotating biological contactor. Aerobic ponds. Anaerobic degradation of organic matter – Stages in the anaerobic process. Anaerobic contact filters. Upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor. Tertiary treatment Nitrification and denitrification processes. Removal of recalcitrant organics from water and wastewater. Construction and working principles of equipments for physical, chemical and biological treatment of wastewater

### Module - IV 
* Air Pollution: Sources of air pollutants. Classification of air pollutants based on origin, chemical composition and state of matter. Origin and Fate of air pollutants. Effects of meteorological conditions on air pollution. Lapse rates. Atmospheric stability. Inversions. Effect of lapse rates and atmospheric stability on dispersion of air pollutants. Plume patterns of gas emission from stacks. Dispersion models for estimation of contaminant concentrations
* Air Pollution Control: Atmospheric cleansing processes. Approaches to air pollution control. Dilution and control at source. Engineered systems for control of particulate contaminants. Construction and working principle of equipments used for particulate removal. Gravitational settling chambers. Centrifugal collectors. Wet collectors. Fabric filters. Electrostatic precipitators. Engineered systems for gaseous pollution control. Major treatment processes for control of gaseous contaminants. Adsorption. Absorption. Condensation. Combustion. Construction and working principle of equipments used for control of gaseous contaminants. Spray towers. Plate towers. Packed towers. Venturi scrubbers. Condensers. Combustion equipments. Indoor air quality. Vehicular pollution and automotive emission control. Noise pollution. Sources of noise. Noise control methods

### Module - V 
* Solid Wastes: Sources of solid wastes. Types of solid wastes: municipal wastes, industrial wastes and hazardous wastes. Properties of solid wastes. Individual components, particle size, moisture content, density and chemical composition. Engineered systems for solid waste management. On-site handling, storage and processing, collection, transfer and transport, processing and recovery and final disposal. Manual component separation. Processing systems. Mechanical volume reduction. Thermal volume reduction. Processing techniques for resource and energy recovery from solid wastes - biochemical and thermochemical processes. Ultimate disposal of solid wastes. Landfilling methods. Area method. Trench method. Leachate and gas collection systems
* Hazardous wastes – Definition and Classification. Characteristics of hazardous wastes. Hazardous waste handling. Source reduction and control. Waste exchange, Waste recycling and reuse. Hazardous waste transportation. Hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal. Waste destruction methods. Incineration. Wet air oxidation. Supercritical water oxidation. Waste concentration methods. Solidification and stabilization technologies

## References
1. Warren, L.; Mc Cabe.; Julian C. S.; Peter H.; (2005). Unit operations of Chemical Engineering. 7th Edition. McGraw-Hill Education, New York.
2. Davis M L and Cornwell D A. (2012). Introduction to Environmental Engineering, Fifth Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Co, Singapore.
3. Tchobanoglous, G.; Burton, F. L.; Stensel, H. D.; (2003). “Wastewater Engineering: Treatment and Reuse”. 4th Edition. Metcalf and Eddy Inc., New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
4. Rao, C.S. (2018). Environmental Pollution Control Engineering, Third Edition, New Age International (P) Ltd., New Delhi.
5. Garg S. K.; (2010). Water Supply Engineering. Khanna Publishers, New Delhi.
6. Tchobanoglous, George (2014). Integrated solid waste management: Engineering principles and management issues, Mc Graw Hill Education, New Delhi.