---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "sw1231"
course_title: "psychology-for-social-work"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1231: Psychology for Social Work 


## Course Objectives
* To enable to understand the human behavior, emotions, feelings and attitudes.
* To give an understanding of the basic concepts of psychology and its application in social work.
* To provide basic awareness about psychiatric disorders.

## Course Content

### Module I - Introducing Psychology
* Psychology: Definition, Meaning, Nature and Scope
* Origin and development of Psychology

### Module II - Basic Psychological Concepts
* Perception: Meaning and Definition
* Learning: Meaning and Definition –Classical Conditioning and Operant Conditioning
* Memory : Meaning, Definition and Types
* Cognition: Meaning and Definition
* Motivation: Meaning and Definition-Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
* Emotion: Types- Primary and Secondary Emotions and Components of Emotions
* Cognitive : Physiological and Behavioral Components
* Attitudes : Meaning and Definition
* Intelligence : Meaning and Definition –Concept of IQ –Multiple Intelligence

### Module III - Personality
* Concept of Personality : Meaning and Factors Affecting Personality
* Theories of Personality
* Biological: Psychodynamic- Freud
* Psycho Social Theory : Erik Erikson
* Behavioral : Skinner, Pavlov and Bandura
* Humanistic: Roger and Adler
* Trait theory : Allport, Myers Type of Personality

### Module IV - Social Psychology 
* Social Psychology: Definition, Meaning
* Concepts: Social Attitude, Social Perception, Morale, Prejudice, Social Cognition
* Group Behaviour: Public Opinion, Rumours, Propaganda; Crowd, Mob and Audience
* Leadership: Definition, Styles and Theories-Contingency, Path- Goal Theory and Trait Theory

### Module V - Application of Psychology in Social Work
* Relevance of Psychology in Social Work
* Application of Psychology in Social Work (Social Case Work: Assessment, Diagnosis, Treatment; Social Group Work: Group Dynamics, Conflict Resolution)

## References
1. Morgan Clifford: Introduction to Psycholog y, McGraw - Hill BookCo., New York, 1986
2. Munn Norman L: Introduction to Psychology, Houghton MiffinCo.Bos, New York, 1969
3. Krech David & Cruchfield Richard S :Elements of Psychology, A Briefer Course, Alfred Knopf, New York, 1970.
4. Elizabeth B.Hurlock: Developmental psychology, Tata McGraw-Hill.Ltd, New Delhi. 1996
5. Elkind David: Children and adolescents:, Oxford University Press, New York, 197
6. Hoffiman Lois, Paris Scott: Developmental psychology, McGraw-Hill Inc, NewYork. 1994.
7. S. K Mangal- Abnormal Psychology.
8. Sarason & Sarason– Abnormal Psychology.
