---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 2
course_code: "sw1241"
course_title: "working-with-groups"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1241: Working with Groups 

## Course Objectives
* To provide an understanding of the basic concepts of social group work.
* To familiarize themselves with group formation, group work process and evaluation.
* To enable them to acquire the ability of analyzing the problems of groups.

## Course Content

### Module I - Introduction to Groups
* Group: Definition, , Characteristics and Types of Groups – In group, Out group; Primary, Secondary and Reference Group
* Purpose of Groups, Advantages and Disadvantages of Groups 

### Module II - Group Development and Group Processes
*  Stages of Group Development : Forming Storming, Norming and Performing
* Group Processes : Meaning, Communication and Interaction Patterns –
Acceptance, Isolation and Rejection
* Group Dynamics : Sub Groups, Cliques – Diads, Triads
* Group Cohesion
* Group Structure : Role, Status, Leadership
* Group Control : Norms, Conflict and Control
* Assessing Group Interaction : Sociogram and Sociometry

### Module III - Introduction to Social Group Work
* Social Group Work: Definition, Objectives/Purpose , Values of Group Work
and Principles of Group Work
* Historical Development of Group Work
* Types of Groups in Social Group Work: Treatment, Task Oriented, Developmental, Recreational, Educational, Training and Therapeutic
* Ethical Considerations in Group Work

### Module IV - Social Group Work Process 
* Phases of Group Work Process : Planning (size, duration), Beginning Phase, Middle Phase, Termination Phase
* Processes of Social Group Work : Intake, , Assessment, Goal Setting, Planning Intervention, Evaluation, Termination and Follow up
* Models of Group Work: Social Goal Model, Remedial Model, Reciprocal Model

### Module V - Skill Training for Working with Groups
* Recruiting members
* Arranging Meetings – Physical Setting, Creating Ambience, Preparing Checklist
* Assessment Skills
* Progressive Planning of Sessions and Setting, Objectives for each Session, Preparing Agenda
* Facilitating Group Interaction – Negotiation, Mediation, Confrontation
* Closure Skills: Evaluation and Termination
* Group Work Recording – Types of Recording- Narrative, Verbatim, Summary, Using audio Video Devices for Recording and Transcribing


## References
1. Konpka, G. (1983). *Social Group Work: A Helping Process*. Englewood Cliffe, N J: Prentice Hall.
2. Siddiqui, H Y. (2008). *Group Work: Theories and Practice*. Jaipur:Rawat Publications.
3. Zastrow, C. (2006). *Social Work with Group: A Comprehensive Work Book*. Belmont, CA: Thomson/Brooks/Cole.