---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 5
course_code: "sw1561.a"
course_title: "gender-and-development"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1561.A: Gender and Development 

## Course Objectives
* To understand the conceptualization of gender
* To understand the changing status of women in contemporary society
* To know the various gender issues in the modern society
* To appreciate the perspectives on gender relations
* To create awareness about the magnitude of gender disparities in the present context

## Course Content
### Module I - Concept of Gender
* Gender –Definition and Conceptualization
* Sex and gender
* Gender stereotypes, gender bias, feminism
* Social construction of gender – gender socialization, gender role

### Module II - Changing Status of Women
* Status and role of women, family, religion, education, economy, health and environment
* Role of Women’s Movements in changing status of women
* Changing role, status of women in India and Kerala

### Module III - Major Women’ Issues
* Gender issues – widowhood, unwed mothers, single women
* Domestic violence, dowry death
* Sexual exploitation, female infanticide
* Women and Trafficking
* Media Violence 

### Module IV - Theories of Gender Relations 
* Liberal and Radical Feminism
* Socialist and Marxist Feminism
* Eco- Feminism
* Post Modern Feminism 

### Module V - Gender and Development 
* Women and Development - Kerala model of development
* Impact of globalization on women.
* Programmes for the development of women –Central and State Governments
* Legislations to protect the interests of women

## References
1. Anne Cranny Francis, Vendy, Gender Studies.
2. Ann Oakley, sex and Society.
3. Chandrakala, Changing Status of Women.
4. Coats, Jennefer – An Introduction to Women’ Studies.
5. David Boucheir, the feminist challenge.
6. Desai Neera- Women’ Movement in India.
7. Dube, Leela et all- Visibility and Power- Essays on Women in society and development.
8. Elliot, Faith Robenton- Gender, Family and society.
9. Einstein, Hester – Contemporary Feminist Thought.
10. G Vijayaswari Rao, - Women and Society.
11. Haralambos, Sociology- Themes and Perspectives.
12. Harding, Sandra – Feminism and Methodology.
13. M N Srinivas, - Changing Status of Women in India.
14. Maitreyi Krishnaraj, - Women Studies in India.
15. Neera Desai and M Krishnaraj, - Women and Society in India.
