---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 5
course_code: "sw1561.b"
course_title: "tribal-welfare-administration"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1561.B: Tribal Welfare Administration 

## Course Objectives
* To familiarize the students with the social and cultural life of the Tribal society in India.
* To equip the students for a comprehensive understanding of the transformations in Tribal society in India.
* To understand the issue of development of tribes and welfare programmes available for Tribal welfare.

## Course Content
### Module I - Nature of Tribal Society
* Tribe : Definition, Characteristics
* Demographic Transition of Tribes: Population, Composition and Distribution in India and Kerala
* Tribal Communities of Kerala

### Module II - Socio-Cultural Organization
* Tribal Society : Family, Village
* Tribal Culture: Characteristics, Traditional Practices, Customs, Values, Mores
* Socio- Political Organizations: Orukoottom
* Religion: Totem, Idle
* Social Status of Tribal Women, Elderly and Children
* Education

### Module III - Challenges of Tribals
* Marginalization of Tribes : Exploitation, Discrimination, Isolation, and, Lack of Education
* Detribalization, Land Alienation, Poverty and Mal nutrition, Lose of Tribal Identity
* Role of Social Work Intervention in reducing issues among tribal community 

### Module IV - Tribal Movements 
* Tribal Movements: Nature and Characteristics
* Santhal Movement , Naga Movement and Bhil Rebellion
* Gandhian Perspectives for Tribal Development

### Module V - Programmes for Tribal Development
* Tribal Policy – Colonial and Post colonial
* Tribal Welfare Programmes – Central and State Agencies
* Constitutional Safeguards for Tribal Welfare
* Role of Non-governmental Agencies

## References
1. Chandra, Ramesh, Minority- Social and Political Conflict.
2. Thomas, John K, Human Rights of Tribals.
3. Gupta, Aman, Human Rights of Indigenous people.
4. Prasad, Archana. Against Ecological Romanticism, Three Essays Collective, New Delhi, 2003.
5. Iyer, L.K.Anathakrishna. The Tribes and Castes of Cochin, Cosmo Pub. N.Delhi 1981 (1909).
6. Iyer, Krishna L.A. Tribes and Castes of Travancore, Cosmo Pub.
7. Tripati S N. Tribals in India: The Changing Scenario, Discovery Pub. 1998
8. Bhandari, B B (Ed) Tribes and Government Policies, Cosmo Pub, 1997.
9. Chacko M Pariyaram. Tribal Communities and Social Change, Sage Pub. N.Delhi, 2005.
10. Joshi, Vidyut. Tribal Situation In India: Issues in Development, Rawat, 1998.
11. Elvin, Verrier. The Tribal World, Oxford University Press, 1964.
12. Rath, Govinda Chandra. Tribal development in India, Sage, 2006.
13. Lodha Neetha, State of Tribal Women, Mangal Deep Pub, Jaipur, 2003.
14. Uttam Kumar Singh & Nayak AK: Tribal Education, Commonwealth Publishers, New Delhi, 1997
15. Sinha BB: Society in Tribal India, B.R Publishing Corporation, Delhi, 1982.
16. Verma RC: Indian Tribes Through the Ages, Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, New Delhi, 1990.
17. Mathur PRG: Tribal Situation in Kerala, Kerala Historical society, Trivandrum,1977.
18. Deogaonkar SG: Problems of Development of Tribal areas, Leeladevi Publications, Delhi, 1980.
19. Kumar BB: The Tribal Societies of India- a macro perception, Omsons Publications, New Delhi, 1998.