---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "6"
course_code: "aot304"
course_title: "vibration-and-aero-elasticity"
language: "english"
contributor: "@9sreerag7"
---

# AOT304: Vibration and Aero Elasticity

## Course Objectives

- Determine the natural frequency of free, damped and forced vibration for different conditions.
- Understand the vibrational concepts of several degrees of freedom systems.
- Apply the approximate methods to find the natural frequency.
- Understand the vibrational concepts of elastic bodies.
- Understand the aeroelastic instabilities and the methods of prevention.

## Modules

### Module 1

- Vibration terminologies – simple harmonic motion, free vibrations.
- Newton’s law – D’Alembert’s principle – spring combination – energy method – Rayleigh’s method.
- Simple and compound pendulum – longitudinal, transverse and torsional vibrations.
- Damped vibrations – types – differential equations – logarithmic decrement.
- Forced vibrations – with and without damping – support excitation – vibration isolation – transmissibility.
- Vibration measuring instruments.

### Module 2

- Two degrees of freedom systems – coordinate coupling – principle coordinates – principle modes – vibration absorber.
- Multi degrees of freedom systems – orthogonality principle – Hamilton’s principle – eigenvalue problems.

### Module 3

- Approximate methods: Rayleigh’s method – Dunkerley’s method – Holzer’s method – Stodola method – matrix method – matrix iteration method – Rayleigh-Ritz method.

### Module 4

- Continuous systems: vibration of strings – longitudinal vibration of bars – lateral vibration of beams – torsional vibration of shafts.

### Module 5

- Aeroelasticity: aeroelasticity concepts – coupling – Collar’s triangle.
- Aeroelastic instabilities and their prevention – wing divergence – loss and reversal of aileron control – flutter and its prevention.

## References

- *V. P. Singh, “Mechanical Vibrations”, Dhanpat Rai & Co (P) Ltd.*
- *Grover G.K., “Mechanical Vibrations”, 7th Edition, Nem Chand Brothers, Roorkee, India, 2003.*
- *Thomson W. T., “Theory of Vibration with Application”, CBS Publishers, 1990.*
- *Fung Y.C., “An Introduction to the Theory of Aeroelasticity”, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.*
- *Timoshenko S., “Vibration Problems in Engineering”, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1993.*
- *Tse F.S., Morse I.F., Hinkle R.T., “Mechanical Vibrations”, Prentice Hall, New York, 1984.*
- *Bisplinghoff R.L., Ashley H., Hoffman R.L., “Aeroelasticity”, Addison Wesley Publication, New York, 1983.*
- *Tongue B.H., “Principles of Vibration”, Oxford University Press, 2000.*
