---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 2
course_code: "24-360-0205"
course_title: "methods-in-environmental-analysis"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0205: METHODS IN ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS

## Course Objectives
* Students majoring in environmental sciences need a foundation in measurement techniques used in the field. Sophisticated instrumental methods of analysis is an essential component of environmental monitoring and assessment and provide enough information to judge the environmental quality. The course will provide in depth knowledge on the various sophisticated  analytical instruments used in the laboratory for environmental chemical analysis and arrange students hands on training of various analytical instruments.

## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Theoretical concepts on atomic spectroscopy, molecular spectroscopy and chromatography techniques.
* **CO 2:** Instrumentation and application of analytical techniques.
* **CO 3:** Sample preparation and operation of the instrument.
* **CO 4:** Interpretation of data.

## Course Content

### Module - I Atomic Spectroscopy
* Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS): Theory, instrumentation and applications of flame AAS, Thermal AAS, Cold Vapour AAS, Interferences in AAS. Atomic Emission Spectrometry: Theory, Instrumentation and applications of Flame photometry, Flame Emission Spectrometry, Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES) and ICP/MS

### Module - II Molecular Spectroscopy
* UV Visible Molecular Absorption Spectrometry: Theory, Instrumentation and applications. Infra-red Spectrometry: Theory, instrumentation and applications, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy: Theory, instrumentation and applications. Mass Spectrometry (MS): Theory, instrumentation and applications

### Module - III Chromatographic Techniques
* Introduction to chromatographic separations: General description, migration rates of solutes, zone broadening, column efficiency, optimization of column performance, applications of chromatography. Gas Chromatography: Principle of Gas - Liquid Chromatography (GLC), Instruments for GLC, Columns and stationery phases, detectors, applications. Gas - Solid Chromatography (GSC). Liquid chromatography (LC): Scope of High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), column efficiency in Liquid Chromatography (LC), Instruments for LC, Theory and applications of Partition chromatography, Adsorption chromatography, Ionexchange chromatography, Size-exclusion chromatography, Thin-layer chromatography(TLC) and GC/MS

### Module - IV Instrumental Analysis and Interpretation of Test Results UV-Visible Spectrophotometer
* Sample preparation testing, Interpretation of the data
and reporting of the results for selected compounds, Phosphate, Sulphate, Nitrite, and Iron
(Fe2+ / Fe 3+)
* **AAS- Atomic Absorption Spectrometer** - Sample preparation testing, Interpretation of the data and reporting of the results for selected compounds (Cu, Mg, Mn, Cr, Fe, Zn)
* **HPLC- High Performance Liquid Chromatography** - Sample preparation testing, Interpretation of the data and reporting of the results for selected compounds (Pyridine, mefnamic acid, Caffeine samples)
* **TOC Analyser- Total Organic Carbon Analysis** - Sample Preparation testing, Interpretation of the data and reporting of the results for selected compounds (Surface water, groundwater and wastewater)

## References
1. Harris, D. C.; (2015). “Quantitative Chemical Analysis”. 9th Edition.
2. Christian, G.D.; Purnendu, K.; Sandy Dasgupta.; Kevin, A. S.; (2014). Analytical Chemistry. 7th edition, ISBN 978-0-470-88757-8.
3. Douglas, A.; Skoog, F.; James, H.; Stanley, R. C.; (2009). “Instrumental Analysis”. 3rd Indian Reprint, Brooks/Cole, a part of Cengage Learning.
4. Mendam, J.; Denny, R.C.; Barnes J.D.; Thomas, J.K.; (2007). “Vogel’s text book of Quantitative Chemical Analysis”. 5th impression, Dorling Kindersley (India) Pvt. Ltd.
5. Andrew, D. E.; Lenore, S.; Glesceri.; Eugene W. R.; Arnold E.; Greenberg.; (Eds) (2005). “Standards Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater Analysis”. 21st Edition, APHA. Washington DC.
6. Roger N. R.; (2002). “Introduction to Environmental Analysis”, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester.
7. Donald, L. P.; Gary, M. L.; George, S. K.; (2001). “Introduction to Spectroscopy”. 3rd Edition, Harcourt College Publishers.
8. Harvey, D. (2000). Modern analytical chemistry. McGraw Hill.