---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "ad"
version: "2024"
semester: "6"
course_code: "pcadt602"
course_title: "internet-of-things"
language: "english"
contributor: "@indhu-subash"
---

# PCADT602: Internet of Things

## Course Objectives

1. To understand the fundamentals of IoT architecture, including its origins, impact, and the convergence with IT.  
2. To explore the components of IoT networks such as smart objects, sensors, actuators, and communication technologies, with a focus on IP optimization and application protocols.  
3. To learn about data analytics for IoT, covering machine learning, big data tools, and methods for securing IoT systems.  

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1
IoT Architecture - What is IoT, Genesis of IoT, IoT and Digitization, IoT Impact, Convergence of IT and IoT, IoT Challenges, IoT Network Architecture and Design, Drivers Behind New Network Architectures, Comparing IoT Architectures, A Simplified IoT Architecture, The Core IoT Functional Stack, IoT Data Management and Compute Stack.  

### Module 2
Engineering IoT Networks - Smart Objects: The “Things” in IoT, Sensors, Actuators, and Smart Objects, Sensor Networks, Connecting Smart Objects, Communications Criteria, IoT Access Technologies.  
IoT Network Layer: IP as the IoT Network Layer, The Business Case for IP, The need for Optimization, Optimizing IP for IoT.  

### Module 3
IoT protocols - Application Protocols for IoT (XMPP, MQTT, CoAP, SOAP, HTTP only), Transport Layer, IoT Application Transport Methods.  
Data Analytics for IoT: Data and Analytics for IoT, An Introduction to Data Analytics for IoT, Machine Learning, Big Data Analytics Tools and Technology.  

### Module 4
Developing IoT Systems - IoT Logical Design using Python, IoT Physical Devices and Endpoints - Raspberry Pi interfaces, Programming Raspberry Pi using Python, WAMP.  
Developing Tools: Arduino, Apache NetBeans, Kinoma, IBM Watson IoT, Node-RED.  
Case study: IoT in Agriculture, IoT in Smart city.  

---

## Reference Books

1. David Hames, Gonzalo Salguerio, Patrick Grossetete, Robert Barton, Jerome Henry, *IoT Fundamentals Networking Technologies, Protocols, and use cases for the Internet of Things*, Pearson Education, 1/e, 2016.  
2. Arshadeep Bahga, Vijay Madisetti, *Internet of Things: A hands-on approach*, University Press, 1/e, 2014.  

---
