---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 2
course_code: "magap02c08"
course_title: "rural-and-urban-governance-in-india"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP02C08: Rural and Urban Governance in India 

## Course Objectives
1. To provide a conceptual and theoretical understanding of decentralization and its various models, particularly in the Indian context.
2. To trace the historical evolution and constitutional development of decentralized governance in India, including key policy milestones and reforms.
3. To critically examine the structure, powers, and functions of rural and urban local bodies under the Indian federal framework.
4. To offer practical exposure to decentralized governance mechanisms through fieldbased learning, with a focus on Kerala’s model.

## Course Outcomes
1. Analyze and compare different theoretical perspectives on decentralization and their application in the Indian governance system.
2. Evaluate the effectiveness of rural and urban decentralized institutions, using constitutional provisions and real-world case studies.
3. Demonstrate practical understanding of local governance mechanisms, especially through field engagement or internships.
4. Apply critical thinking and policy analysis skills to assess challenges and propose improvements in decentralized governance practices.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 Introduction
1. Meaning, Definition, Features, and Concept of Decentralisation.
2. Evolution of the Decentralised mode of governance.
3. Definition, characteristics, and features of Urban-Rural governance.
4. Types of Decentralisation-Political, Administrative and Fiscal.

### Module - 2 Decentralised Governance in India
1. History and Evolution of Local Governance in India: The Colonial era, postindependence era (1947-1992), and Committees Reports on Decentralisation.
2. Views on Decentralisation: Gandhian Vs neoliberal.
3. Background and Features of 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments.
4. 11th and 12th Schedules.

### Module - 3 Rural Bodies 
1. Grama Sabha, Powers, and Functions.
2. Grama Panchayat- Composition, Structure, powers, functions, resource base, and major limitations.
3. Block Panchayat- Composition, Structure, powers, functions, resource base, and major limitations.
4. District Panchayat- Composition, Structure, powers, functions, resource base, and major limitations. 

### Module - 4 Urban Local Bodies
1. Municipality: Composition, Structure, powers, functions, resource base, and major limitations.
2. Municipal Corporation: Composition, Structure, powers, functions, resource base, and major limitations. 

## Reading List
1. Aziz, Abdul and David J. Arnold (1996): *Decentralized Governance in Asian Countries* (eds.), New Delhi: Sage.
2. Bhatnagar (1978): *Rural Development in India*, New Delhi: Light and Life Publishers.
3. Bhattacharya, Mohit (1976): *Management of Urban Government in India*, New Delhi: Uppal. Burns, Danny et al. (1994): *The Politics of Decentralization: Revitalizing Local Democracy*, London: Macmillan.
4. Chaturvedi, T.N. and Abhijit Datta (1984): *Local Government*, New Delhi: IIPA. Concept.
5. Devas, Nick (2004): *Urban Governance Voice and Poverty in the Developing World*, New York:
6. George, Jose (2003): *Decentralized Administration and Participatory Planning in Kerala*, Mumbai: Himalaya Publishing House. 
7. Golahait, S.B. (2010): *Rural Development Programmes in India: Problems and Prospects*, New Delhi: Altar.
8. Hooja, Rakesh and K.K. Parnani (eds.) (2006): *Development Administration and Rural Development*, New Delhi: Aalekh.
9. Isaac, T.M.Thomas (2000): Local Democracy and Development: *People’s Campaign for Decentralized Planning in Kerala*, New Delhi: Leftword.
10. Jain, Gopal Lal (1997): *Rural Development*, New Delhi: Mangaldeep.
11. Jain, S. P. (ed.) (2001): *Emerging Institutions for Decentralized Rural Development*, Hyderabad: NIRD.
12. Maheshwari, S R (1984): *Local Government in India*, New Delhi: Orient Longman.
13. Manohar K. Murali, Seetharama Rao and Janardhan Rao (ed.) (1994): *Political Economy of Rural Development*, New Delhi: Kanishka.
14. Misra, Harekrishna (2011): *Governance of Rural Information and Communication Technologies*:
15. Mohanty, Manoranjan, et al. (eds.) (2007): *Grassroots Democracy in India and China*, New Delhi: Sage.
16. Narasaiah, Lakshmi (2003): *Approaches to Rural Development*, New Delhi: Discovery.
17. Narayana, E.A. (1990): *Voluntary Organizations and Rural Development in India*, New Delhi.
18. Oakley Peter, et. al (1984): *Approaches to Participation in Development*, Geneva: ILO.
19. Oakley, Peter (1991): *Projects with People: The Practice of Participation in Rural Development*, Geneva: ILO.
20. Palanithurai, G. (2009): *Decentralization in India; Critical Issues from the Field*, New Delhi: Palgrave MacMillan.
21. Pierre, Jon (2011): *The Politics of Urban Governance: Rethinking the Local State*, London:
22. Raghunandanan,T.R. (2012): *Decentralization and Local Governments: The Indian Experience*, New Delhi: Orient Blackswan.
23. Rao, C. Nagaraja (2007): *Accountability of Urban Local Governments in India*, New Delhi: Routledge Sage.
24. Singh, Hoshiar (1995): *Administration of Rural Development in India*, New Delhi: Sterling.
25. Singh, Katar (2009): *Rural Development: Principles, Policies and Management*, New Delhi.
26. Singh, Satyajit and Pradeep Sharma (2007): *Decentralization: Institutions and Politics in Rural India*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
27. Sivaramakrishanan K.C., et al. (1993): *Urbanisation in India: Basic Services and People’s Participation*, New Delhi: ISS. Uppal. 