---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 5
course_code: "pccet503"
course_title: "environmental-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# PCCET503: ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING

## Course Objectives
- To equip students with the skills to assess water quality and design appropriate treatment processes to ensure water meets health and safety standards.
- To study with knowledge of various wastewater treatment processes, including primary, secondary, and tertiary treatments, as well as advanced treatment technologies.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1
- **Water Treatment:** Introduction to environmental engineering, population forecast, water demand estimation, and types of demand. Systems of sewerage: separate and combined. Layout plan of a conventional water treatment plant, site selection, intakes, screening, and aeration.
- **Sedimentation:** Theory and principles of sedimentation, Stoke's Law, types of settling, and design of plain sedimentation tanks.
- **Filtration:** Mechanisms of coagulation and flocculation, popular coagulants. Theory of filtration, types of filters, and design of a slow sand and rapid sand filter.

### Module 2
- **Water Quality:** Basic concepts of water quality, analysis and testing of water.
- **Disinfection:** Theory of disinfection, types of disinfection, chlorination, and other disinfectants.
- **Water Distribution System:** Layout, types of pipes, joints, and fittings. Design of water distribution networks.
- **Waste Water:** Basic concepts of waste water characteristics, analysis of wastewater, and standards for disposal.

### Module 3
- **Waste Water Treatment:** Treatment flow diagram, unit operations and processes.
- **Primary Treatment:** Screens, grit chambers, primary sedimentation tanks.
- **Secondary Treatment:** Activated sludge process (ASP), tricksy filters, and rotating biological contactors (RBC).
- **Advanced Waste Water Treatment:** Reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, and ion exchange.

### Module 4
- **Sludge Treatment and Disposal:** Methods of sludge digestion.
- **Solid Waste Management:** Sources, classification, and methods of collection and disposal. Landfill, composting, and incineration.
- **Air Pollution:** Sources, effects, and control measures.

---

## References
- Metcalf and Eddy, *Waste Water Engineering*, Tata McGraw Hill publishing Co Ltd, 2003.
- S. K. Garg, *Water supply engineering*, Khanna Publishers, 37th Edition, 2024.
- S. K. Garg, *Sewage and air pollution engineering*, Khanna Publishers, 43rd Edition, 2024.
- B. C. Punmia, Arun Kumar Jain, Ashok Kumar Jain, *Water supply engineering*, Laxmi Publications.
- Ashok Kumar Gupta, Vengatesh Uddameri, Abhradeep, Majumder, Shripad K. Nimbhorkar, *Wastewater engineering, issues trends and solutions*.
