---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "5"
course_code: "cst307"
course_title: "microprocessors-and-microcontrollers"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CST307: Microprocessors and Microcontrollers

## Course Objectives
* Illustrate the architecture, modes of operation and addressing modes of microprocessors.
* Develop 8086 assembly language programs.
* Demonstrate interrupts, their handling and programming in 8086.
* Illustrate how different peripherals (8255, 8254, 8257) and memory are interfaced with microprocessors.
* Outline features of microcontrollers and develop low level programs.

## Course Content
### Module - 1 (Evolution of Microprocessors)
* 8085 microprocessor – Basic Architecture only.  
* 8086 microprocessor – Architecture and signals, Physical Memory organization, Minimum and maximum mode of 8086 system and timings.  
* Comparison of 8086 and 8088.  
* Machine language instruction format.

### Module - 2 (Addressing Modes and Instructions)
* Addressing Modes of 8086.  
* Instruction set – Data copy/transfer instructions, arithmetic instructions, logical instructions, string manipulation instructions, branch instructions, unconditional and conditional branch instruction, flag manipulation and processor control instructions.  
* Assembler Directives and operators.  
* Assembly Language Programming with 8086.

### Module - 3 (Stack and Interrupts)
* Stack structure of 8086, programming using stack.  
* Interrupts – Types of Interrupts and Interrupt Service Routine, Handling Interrupts in 8086, Interrupt programming.  
* Programmable Interrupt Controller - 8259 (mention control word only).  
* Interfacing Memory with 8086.

### Module - 4 (Interfacing Chips)
* Programmable Peripheral Input/Output port 8255 – Architecture and modes of operation.  
* Programmable Interval Timer 8254 – Architecture and modes of operation.  
* DMA Controller 8257 – Architecture (mention control word only).  

### Module - 5 (Microcontrollers)
* 8051 Architecture – Register Organization, Memory and I/O addressing, Interrupts and Stack.  
* 8051 Addressing Modes.  
* Instruction Set – Data transfer instructions, arithmetic instructions, logical instructions, Boolean instructions, control transfer instructions.  
* Simple programs.

## References
* Bhurchandi and Ray, *Advanced Microprocessors and Peripherals*, Third Edition, McGraw Hill.
* Raj Kamal, *Microcontrollers: Architecture, Programming, Interfacing and System Design*, Pearson Education.
* Ramesh Gaonkar, *Microprocessor Architecture, Programming, and Applications with the 8085*, Penram International Publishing Pvt. Ltd.
* Barry B. Brey, *The Intel Microprocessors – Architecture, Programming and Interfacing*, Eighth Edition, Pearson Education.
* A. NagoorKani, *Microprocessors and Microcontrollers*, Second Edition, Tata McGraw Hill.
* Douglas V. Hall, SSSP Rao, *Microprocessors and Interfacing*, Third Edition, McGraw Hill Education.
