---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "pcaot303"
course_title: "mechanics-of-aircraft-materials"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PCAOT303 - Mechanics of Aircraft Materials

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the concepts of stress, strain, and deformation under the influence of various loads.
2.  To assess the stresses and deformation in simple structural members like beams, bars, and shafts.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to Stress and Strain

-  : Stress & Strain, Poisson’s ratio. Stress – strain curves for mild
steel in tension, aluminium alloy, hard and soft rubber, brittle material and
copper in compression. Hooke’s law for linearly elastic isotropic material
under axial and shear deformation, Bulk modulus, biaxial and triaxial
deformations. Relationship between material constant (Derivations). Stress
and strain tensors and its components, Factor of safety, Margin of safety

### Module 2: Deformation in Axially Loaded Bars

-   Principle of superposition. Calculation
of stresses in straight, Stepped and tapered sections, Composite sections,
Stresses due to temperature change Deformation of prismatic and conical bar
under its self-weight. Strain energy, resilience and toughness – for pure axial
loading, prismatic and conical bar under self-weight.


### Module 3: Analysis of Beams

-  Types of Loads, types of Support, types of Beams, bending couple
and twisting couple (Concept Only). Determination of support reaction,
Shear force and bending moments, Relationships between loads-shear forcebending moments (Derivation for all the cases). Bending moment and shear
force diagrams of beams (cantilever and simply supported) subjected to
concentrated load, uniformly distributed loads, uniformly varying loads,
couples and their combinations, Point of contra flexure, point and magnitude
of maximum bending point and maximum shear force.


### Module 4: Flexural and Torsional Stresses

-  Theory of simple bending, Assumptions, derivation of
equation of bending, neutral axis, determination of bending stresses
(rectangular, square, triangular, solid circular and hollow circular sections
only). Torsion - Derivation of equation of torsion, Assumptions, application
of torsional equation to solid and hollow circular shaft, torsional rigidity.
Stresses on inclined planes – Principal Stresses and
Principal Planes – Maximum shear stress – Mohr’s circle method.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Mechanics of Materials* – James Gere & Barry Goodno, Thomson-Engineering, 9th Edition, 2022
-   *Strength of Materials* – S. Ramamrutham & R. Narayanan, Dhanpat Rai Publishing, 20th Edition, 2020
-   *A Textbook of Strength of Materials - Mechanics of Solids* – Bansal R. K., Laxmi Publications, 6th Edition, 2022
-   *Strength of Materials* – S. S. Rattan, McGraw Hill Education India, 2nd edition, 2011
-   *Aircraft Materials and Processes* – Titterton.G, Pitman Publishing, 5th Edition, 1995
-   *Strength of Materials* – R. Subramanian, Oxford University, 3rd Edition, 2016

---
