---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "pbaot304"
course_title: "fluid-mechanics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PBAOT304 - Fluid Mechanics

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the fundamental concepts of fluid mechanics.
2.  To analyse the effects of pressure, velocity, and density of fluids on various bodies.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to Fluid Mechanics

-   Fluids and continuum, Properties of fluids, Newton’s law of
viscosity. Ideal and real fluids, Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids, Fluid
Statics- Pressure-density-height relationship, manometers, pressure on plane
and curved surfaces, Centre of pressure, buoyancy, stability of immersed and
floating bodies, measurement of pressure. (Problems)


### Module 2: Fluid Kinematics and Dynamics

-   Eulerian and Lagrangian
approaches, Types of fluid flow. Equation of streamline, Velocity and
acceleration in fluid flow, Euler’s equation, Bernoulli’s equation,
Venturimeter and Orifice meters, Notches and Weirs (No derivations),
Hydraulic Coefficients, Navier-Stokes equations. Dimensional analysis,
Buckingham’s theorem, non-dimensional numbers, Modal Analysis, Types
of similarities (Problems)

### Module 3: Viscous Flow and Head Loss

-   : Viscous flow through circular duct, parallel
plates, Loss of head due to friction in viscous flow. Reynolds experiment,
Frictional loss in pipe flow, Shear stress in turbulent flow a pipe, Velocity
distribution in turbulent pipe flow, Major and Minor losses in pipe flow
Hydraulic gradient and total energy line, Cavitation. (Problems)

### Module 4: Boundary Layer Theory

-    Growth of boundary layer over a flat
plate and definition of boundary layer thickness, displacement thickness,
momentum thickness and energy thickness, laminar and turbulent boundary
layers, laminar sub layer, velocity profile, Von- Karman momentum
integral equations for the boundary layers, calculation of drag, separation of
boundary and methods of control.
Impact of Jets-Force exerted by jet on moving plates.


---

## Reference Books

-   *Fluid Mechanics & Hydraulic Machines* – R K Bansal, McGraw Hill, 6th Edition
-   *Fluid Mechanics, Fundamental and application* – Yunus A. Cengal, McGraw Hill, 7th edition
-   *Fluid Mechanics* – Pijush K. Kundu, McGraw Hill, 2th edition
-   *Fluid Mechanics* – Frank M. White, McGraw Hill, 8th edition
-   *Hydraulic and Fluid Mechanics* – Dr. Modi & S M Seth, Amit Publishers and distributors

---
