---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 4
course_code: "magap04c13"
course_title: "polity-and-governance-in-kerala"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP04C13: Polity and Governance in Kerala

## Course Objectives
1. To develop a critical understanding of the socio-political, economic, and historical factors that have shaped modern Kerala.
2. To explore the role of various actors, such as political parties, interest groups, social movements, and civil society initiatives, in building Kerala's democratic society.
3. To analyze the economic sectors of Kerala, focusing on the key policies, laws, and development initiatives that have influenced the state’s economic growth and transformation.
4. To examine the issues faced by marginalized social groups and ideological currents in Kerala's socio-political environment, and their emerging significance in politics and policymaking.

## Course Outcomes
1. Critically assess the socio-political and economic factors that contributed to the development of modern Kerala and understand the historical processes involved.
2. Evaluate the roles of political parties, interest groups, and civil society initiatives in shaping Kerala's democratic processes and policies.
3. Analyze the impact of key economic sectors, labor migration, and development policies on Kerala’s economic landscape, and understand the implications of these factors for its future.
4. Identify and critically assess the issues faced by marginalized social groups, and understand their role in contemporary political and policy debates in Kerala.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 Making of Modern Kerala
1. Caste and Class Structure from 19thCentury to the Present & Impact of Colonialism and Role of Missionaries.
2. Social Reform in Kerala & Movements for Representation and Recognition, Equality and Democratisation in Kerala - Malayali and Ezhava Memorial, Temple Entry and Abstention Movements.

### Module - 2 Political Processes and Formation of Kerala
1. Rise of Representative Institutions & Emergence of National Movement, Trade Unions, Peasant Movements, Communist Parties.
2. Aikya Kerala Movement & 1957 Government and Vimochana Samaram.

### Module - 3 Political Parties and Interest Groups
1. Political Parties in Keral, and Interest Groups: Caste, Religious and Community Groups.
2. Electoral Politics – Coalition Politics – Emerging Trends & Peoples Planning Programme.

### Module - 4 Political Economy of Kerala
1. Land Reforms, Land Question in Contemporary Kerala; Movements - Muthanga, Chengara, and Kerala Economy – Major Sectors – Emerging Trends, Kerala Model of Development: Features, Challenges and Criticisms, SocioEconomic Issues of Dalits Adivasis, and Fisherfolks.
2. Labour Migration from Kerala, Migrant Labour to Kerala: Implications, Poverty Alleviation: Kudumbasree; Social, Environmental Movements & Issues in Kerala.

## Reading List
1. Robin Jeffry (2013) Chapter 1, 3 & 4 in Decline of Nair Dominance, DC Books, Kottayam.
2. EMS (1984) Kerala Society and Politics: A Historical Survey, National Book Centre, Delhi.
3. P. Sivanandan (1979) Caste, Class and Economic Opportunity in Kerala: An Empirical Analysis, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 14, no. 7/8, pp. 475-480. 
4. Osella and Osella 2000 Conclusion, in *Social Mobility in Kerala: Modernity and Identity in Conflict*, Pluto Press.
5. Robin Jeffry (2013) Chapter- 2, Decline of Nair Dominance, DC Books, Kottayam.
6. K. N. Ganesh (1990) ഉത്പാദനബന്ധങ്ങൾ: കോളോണിയലിസവും അതിനുേശഷവും, കേരളത്തത്തിന്റെ ഇന്നലെകൾ, in Kerala Bhasha Institute.pp.147-175.
7. Dilip M. Menon (2002) Religion and Colonial Modernity: Rethinking Belief and Identity, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 37, no. 17 (Apr. 27 - May 3,), pp. 1662-1667. 
8. P. Govindapilla (2013) കേരള നവോത്ഥാനം: ഒരു മാർക്സിസ്റ്റ് വീക്ഷണം, Chintha ,Trivandrum.
9. C. V.Kunjuraman, Interview with Guru–in K.N.Shaji (2002), Sree Narayana Guru:Jeevitham, Darsanum, Kruthikal, Current Books, Thrissur, pp 459-466.
10. Sunil P. Elayidam (2016) കേരള നവോത്ഥാനം: വിമർശനഫലങ്ങളെ ഭയക്കാതിരിക്കുക, ആത്മം, അപരം, അധിനിവേശം in Eye Books, pp.88-105.
11. K. N. Ganesh (2010) കോളോണിയലിസവും കേരളീയ നവോത്ഥാനവും മാർക്സിസ്റ്റ് സംവാദം 10 (37-38 ) May-October.pp.127-132.
12. P. Sanal Mohan (2015) Discourses on Struggles against Inequalities: Dalit Movements in early 20<sup>th</sup> Century, in P. SanalMohan, *Modernity of Slavery*, OUP, New Delhi, pp.116-151.
13. Robin Jeffry (2013) Chapter- 5, Decline of Nair Dominance.
14. J. Prabhash (1987) Malayali Memorial: Class Interest Through Community Interaction, *Journal of Kerala Studies*, Vol- XIV (1-4).
15. P. K. Madhavan (1986) വൈക്കം സത്യാഗ്രഹം, in ടി കെ മാധവന്റെ ജീവചരിത്രം ഡി സി ബുക്സ് കോട്ടയം .pp 148-173.
16. Robin Jeffrey (1976) Temple-Entry Movement in Travancore, 1860-1940, *Social Scientist*, Vol. 4, No. 8 pp. 3-27. 
17. K. N. Panikkar (2016) Vaikom Satyagraham: Struggle Against Untouchability, in K. N. Panikkar, *Essays on History and Society of Kerala*, KCHR, pp.241-228. 
18. K. K. Kusuman (1976) Nivarthana Prashobhanam, Kerala Historical Society, Thiruvananthapuram. 
19. J. Prabhash (2016) Evolution of Legislative Institutions in Kerala, in Kerala Legislature History and Politics, Institute of Parliamentary Affairs, Trivandrum, pp 6-25.
20. N. Sasidharan (1984) History of Travancore Legislature, Kerala Historical Society, Trivandrum.
    a. Sreedhara Menon (1997) Kerala and Freedom Struggle, DC Books, Kottayam.
21. K. N. Ganesh (1990) കേരളത്തിന്റെ ജനാധിപത്യവത്ക്കരണം, in കേരളത്തത്തിന്റെ ഇന്നലെകൾ
22. G.D.Nair (2014) കേരളത്തിലെ തൊഴിലാളിപ്രസ്ഥാനത്തിന്റെ ചരിത്രം, Chintha, Trivandrum.
23. E.M.S. (1994) The Communist Party in Kerala: Six Decades of Struggle and Advance, National Book Centre, New Delhi.
24. K. K. N. Kurup (1988) Peasantry and the Anti-Imperialist Struggles in Kerala, *Social Scientist*, Vol. 16, No. 9, Sep. pp. 35-45. 
25. T. M. Thomas Isaac (1986) The National Movement and the Communist Party in Kerala, *Social Scientist*, Vol. 14, No. 8/9 pp. 59-80.
26. A ശ്രീധരമേനോൻ (1988) കേരള രാഷ്ട്രീയചരിത്രം, DC Books, Kottayam.
27. Georges Kristoffel Lieten (1970)Progressive State Governments: An Assessment of First Communist Ministry in Kerala, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 14, no. 1 , pp. 29-39. 
28. S. Ramachandran Pillai (2009) EMS Namboodiripad and the Communist Government of Kerala, *The Marxist* XXV, 3-4 July-September.
29. K. N. Ganesh (2008) വിമോചനസമരത്തിന്റെ അന്തരാർത്ഥങ്ങൾ, in P Rajeev (ed) 1957 EMS Ministry: History and Politics, Chintha, Trivandrum, pp. 203-209.
30. E.M.S. (1994) The Communist Party in Kerala: Six Decades of Struggle and Advance, National Book Centre, New Delhi.
31. Robin Jeffrey (1978) Matriliny, Marxism, and the Birth of the Communist Party in Kerala,
1930-1940, *The Journal of Asian Studies*, Vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 77-98. 
32. R. Santhosh & M.S. Visak (2020) Muslim League in Kerala, Exploring the Question of ‘Being Secular’, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 55, Issue no. 7, pp. 50-57. 
33. Gopa Kumar (1984) The Congress Party and State Politics, Deep and Deep Publications, New Delhi.
34. ജോസഫ് പുലിക്കുന്നേൽ കേരള കോൺഗ്രസിന്റെ സ്ഥാന ചരിത്രം, DC Books.
35. Thomas Johnson Nossiter, Communism in Kerala: A Study in Political Adaptation, University of California Press 1982.
36. J. Prabhash (2020) Caste/Communal Politics and Democratic Order, in K N Panikkar (ed) Caste in Kerala, Primus Books, Delhi, pp. 238-254.
37. M. K. Das (2203) Kerala: Politics of Pressure Groups, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol-38, no 31, pp. 2334-3235.
38. George Mathew (1989) Communal Road to Secular Kerala, Concept Publishing, Delhi.
39. Robert L. Hardgrave Jr (1964) Castein Kerala A Preface to The Elections, *The Economic Weekly*, Vol-16, no 47, pp.1841-1847.
40. Manas Chakrabarty and Rebecca Vinita Tamang (2006) Kerala: A Study of Electoral Dynamics and Voting Behaviour, 1957 –2004, *The Indian Journal of Political Science*, Vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 133-142.
41. Balakrishnan Nair (1994) The Dynamics of Kerala Politics, *The Indian Journal of Political Science*, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp.251-2610.
42. V. Bijukumar (2018) Seventeenth General Election and its Political Dividends in Kerala, *Journal of Parliamentary Studies*, Vol. 10,no. 1, pp.30-38.
43. K.K. Kailash (2011) Political Outsourcing as a Coalition Strategy in Kerala,” in Gurpreet Mahajan (ed.). *Accommodating Diversity: Ideas and Institutional Practices*, OUP, New Delhi, pp. 82-205.
44. എ. രാമൻപിള്ള, കേരളരാഷ്ട്രീയത്തിന്റെ അന്തർധാരകൾ, കേരള ഭാഷാ ഇൻസ്റ്റിറ്റ്യൂട്ട് തിരുവനന്തപുരം.
45. Robin Jeffrey, Coalitions and Consequences: Learner ship and Leadership in India, 1948–2008 ASARC Working Paper 2008/2 available from https://crawford.anu.edu.au/acde/asarc/pdf/papers/2008/WP2008_02.pdf
46. James Chiriyankandath (1997) ‘Unity in diversity'? Coalition politics in India (with special reference to Kerala), Democratization, 4:4, 16-39, DOI: 10.1080/13510349708403534
47. Thomas Isaac and Franke (2000): Local Democracy and Development: People’s Campaign for Decentralized Planning in Kerala, Leftword, New Delhi
48. Jose Chathukulam & M S John (2002) Building Social Capital through State Initiative; Participatory Planning in Kerala, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 37, no. 20, pp.1939-1948.
49. Rajan. Gurukkal (2001) When a Coalition of Conflicting Interests Decentralises: ATheoretical Critiqueof Decentralisation Politics in Kerala, *Social Scientist*, vol. 29, no. 9/10, pp. 60–76. https://doi.org/10.2307/3517984. 
50. Nissim Mannathukkaren (2010) The 'Poverty' of Political Society: Partha Chatterjee and the People's Plan Campaign in Kerala, India. *Third World Quarterly*. Vol. 31, pp. 295-314. 
51. K N Raj and Michael Tharakan (1983)Agrarian Reform in Kerala and Its Impact on the Rural Economy – A Preliminary Assessment, ILO Working Paper http://www.ilo.org/public/libdoc/ilo/1981/81B09_623_engl.pdf (application/pdf)
52. Radhakrishnan, P (1981) Land Reforms in Theory and Practice: The Kerala Experience, *Economic and Political Weekly*, vol 16, no 52, pp. 129-137.
53. Ronald J. Herring (1984) Land to the Tiller: The Political Economy of Agrarian Reform in South Asia. *Public Choice* 44, 391–392.
54. Ronald J Herring (1980) Abolition of Landlordism in Kerala- A Redistribution of Privilege, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol 15, no. 26, pp-59-69.
55. George Kurian, Amrutha Jose Pampackal(2017) Question of Land, Livelihood and Development: Tribal Resettlement and Development Mission, Kerala, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 52, Issue No. 7, pp. 99-106.
56. Rammohan. K. T (2008) Caste and Landlessness in Kerala: Signals from Chengara, *Economic & Political Weekly*, Vol. 43, no. 37 pp.14-16.
57. C. R. Bijoy & K Ravi Raman (2003) Muthanga: The Real Story: Adivasi Movement to Recover Land, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 38, no. 20, pp.1975-82
58. Kerala Economic Review 2020
59. Kerala Development Report 2021, Planning Board
60. T. K.Oomen (2009) Development Policy and the Nature of Society: Understanding the Kerala Model, *Economic & Political Weekly*, Vol xliv no 13, pp..25-31.
61. Lieten, G. K (2002)Human Development in Kerala: Structure and Agency in History, *Economic & Political Weekly*, Vol. 37, no. 1620 April, pp.1539-44.
62. Richard W Frankeand Barbara H. Chasin (1999)Is the Kerala Model Sustainable? Lessons from the past: Prospects for the Future, in Oommen (ed.), *Kerala’s Development Experience*, Vol I New Delhi: Concept Publishing Company, pp. 118-48.
63. V.K. Ramachandran (1997) On Kerala’s Development Achievements,in Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen (eds) *Indian Development: Selected Regional Perspectives*, OUP, New Delhi.
64. Kerala Economic Review 2020.
65. K. K. Subrahmanian Syam Prasad (2008) Rising Inequality with High Growth Isn't This Trend Worrisome? Analysis of Kerala Experience, CDS Working Paper -401.
66. John Kurian (1995) The Kerala Model: Its Central Trends and the Outlier, *The Social Scientist*, Vol. 23, No. 1/3 Jan. - Mar, pp. 70-90. 
67. Dhanuraj, D (2004) Traditional Fisherfolk in Kerala and their Livelihood Issues, CCS Research papers, Centre for Civil Society, New Delhi.
68. Gadgil and Kasturirangan Reports – Kerala Conservation of Paddy Land and Wetland Act, 2008
69. K. Ravi Raman (2018) EnvironmentalPolitics, in K P Kannan (ed) Kerala in Transition, COSTFORD, pp.217-226.
70. K. Ravi Raman (2017) Subaltern Modernity: Kerala, the Eastern Theatre of Resistance in the Global South, Sociology, Vol-51, no-1, pp.91-110.
71. T. T. Sreekumar and Govindan Parayil (2010) Social Space, Civil Society and Transformative Politics of New Social Movements in K Raviraman (ed) Kerala-Development, Democracy, and the State : Critiquing the Kerala Model of Development, London, Routledge, pp. 237-253.
72. Kerala Migration Survey-2020
73. Joseph, K.V (1988) Migration and Economic Development of Kerala, Mittal Publications Delhi.
74. Dr. Jajati Keshari Parida (2021) A study on In-migration, Informal Employment and Urbanization in Kerala, State Planning Board, Kerala, Trivandrum.
75. K. C. Zachariah & S. Irudaya Rajan (2012)Introduction, Chapter 3 & 7 in *Kerala’s Gulf Connection: Economic and Social Impact of Migration*, 1988-2011, Oriented Black swan, Delhi.
76. കെ എൻ ഹരിലാൽ & സി എ‌ അഖിൽ (2021) പ്രവാസി മലയാളികളും കേരളവും, ഡോ. രഘുനാഥൻ എം (ed) കേരള സമൂഹവും  രാഷ്ട്രീയവും: മാറുന്ന ഭൂമിക, കേരള ഭാഷാ ഇൻസ്റ്റിറ്റ്യൂട്ട്, തിരുവനന്തപുരം. 
77. Glyn Williams & Binitha V. Thampi, et al (2011) Performing Participatory Citizenship: Politics and Power in Kerala's Kudumbashree Programme, *Journal of Development Studies*, vol. 47(8), July, pp. 1261-1280.
78. J. Devika and Thampi B.V. (2007) Between ‘Empowerment’ and ‘Liberation’? The Kudumbashree in Kerala, *Indian Journal of Gender Studies* 14(1), pp. 33-60. DOI: 10.1177/097152150601400103.
79. M. A. Oommen (2008) Micro Finance and Poverty Alleviation: The Case of Kerala’s Kudumbashree, Working Paper No. 17, Centre for Socio-economic & Environmental Studies (CSES).

### Additional Reading List
1. Biju, M.R (1997): Politics of Democracy and Decentralisation in India: A Case Study of Kerala, Delhi: Atlantic
2. Chander, N. Jose (ed.) (1986): Dynamics of State Politics: Kerala, New Delhi: Sterling.
3. Chander, Jose (1981): Legislative Process in Kerala, Trivandrum: KAPS.
4. Chandrika, C. S (2014): Keralathile Sthree Charithrangal, Sthree Munnetangal, Kottayam: D C Books.
5. Chentharassery, T.H.P (2014): Ayyankali-Adhasthitharude Padathalavan, Trivandrum: Mythri Books.
6. Cherian, P.J. (ed.) (1999): Perspectives on Kerala History, Trivandrum: KCHR.
7. Desai, A. R (2011): Social Background of Indian Nationalism, New Delhi: Popular Prakashan.
8. Franke, Richard W. and Barbara H. Chasin (1992): Kerala: Development through Radical Reform, New Delhi: Promilla & Co.
9. Ganesh, K. N. (ed.)(2004): Culture and Modernity: Historical Explorations, Thenjippalam: University of Calicut.
10. Ganesh, K.N (2003): Keralathinte Samoohika Prathissanthy, Trissur: Centre for Social Studies. Gopakumar, P F (2007): Keraleeya Navodhanam, Trivandrum: Chintha Publications.
11. Gopakumar, G. (1986): Regional Political Parties and State Politics, New Delhi, Deep and Deep publishers.
12. Gopalan, A.K. (1992): Ente Jeevitha Katha, Trivandrum: Chintha Publications.
13. Heller, Patrick (2000): The Labor of Development: Workers and the Transformation of Capitalism in Kerala, India, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
14. Herring, Ronald J, 1980 Abolition of Landlordism in Kerala- A Redistribution of Privilege, EPW, Vol. 16, No. 52, : 129-137. Vol 15, Issue No. 26. 
15. Jeffrey, Robin (1993): *Politics, Women and Wellbeing, How Kerala Became a Model?* New Delhi, Oxford University Press.
    a. Jayasankar, (2012) കമ്മ്യൂണിസ്റ്റ് ഭരണവും വിമോചനസമരവും, Mathrubhumi books.
16. John, John P. (1983): Coalition Governments in Kerala, Trivandrum: Institute for the Study of Public Policy and Management.
17. Joseph, T.M (ed.) (2009): Decentralised Governance and Development, Delhi: Deep and Deep.
18. Kjosavik, Darley Jose and Nadarajah Shanmugaratnam (2015): Political Economy of Development in India: Indigeneity in Transition in the State of Kerala, Abingdon: Rooutledge.
19. Kochu, K. K (2013): Dalith Nerkazchakal, Kottayam: Raven Publications.
20. Kochu, K K, Idathupakshamillatha Kalam, D C Books, Kottayam. 
21. Kunhaman, M. (2002): Globalisation: A Subaltern Perspective, Thiruvananthapuram: Center for Subaltern Studies.
22. Kunhikannan, T. P. (2013): Gadgil Reportum Kerala Vikasanavum, Kozhikode: Mathrubhoomi Books
23. Kurian, Mathew V. (1986): The Caste – Class Formations: A Case Study of Kerala, New Delhi: BR Publishing Corporation.
24. Kurup, K K N (1989): Agrarian Struggles in Kerala, Trivandrum: CBH Publishers.
25. Malaviya, H D (1958): Kerala: A Report to the Nation, New Delhi: People‟s Publishing House.
26. Mammen, P.M (1981): Communism vs Communalism; A study of Socio-Religious Communities and Political Parties in Kerala:1892-1970 (Calcutta: Minerva)
27. Menon, A. Sreedhara (2006): A Survey of Kerala History, Chennai: Viswanathan Publishers. Menon, P.K.K.(1972): The History of Freedom Movement in Kerala, Thiruvnanthapuram: Government Press
28. Nair, A. Balakrishnan (1994): The Government and Politics of Kerala: Structure, Dynamics and Development, Trivandrum: Indira Publishers.
29. Namboodiri, D. Damodaran (1999): “Caste and Social Reformation Movements in Kerala,” in P J Cherian (ed.), Perspectives on Kerala History, Trivandrum: KCHR.
30. OlleTörnquist, Movement, Politics and Development: The Case of Kerala Author. Social Scientist, Nov. - Dec., 2001, Vol. 29, No. 11/12 (Nov. - Dec., 2001), pp. 5787
31. Namboodiripad, E. M. S (1984): Kerala Society and Politics: An Historical Survey. New Delhi: National Book Centre.
32. Narayana Pillai, C (2004) Thiruvithamcore Swathanthrya Samara Charitram(mal.), Narayana Pillai Foundation, Thiruvananthapuram.
33. Nossiter, T.J. (1982): Communism in Kerala: A Study in Political Adaptation, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
34. Oommen, M.A (ed.) (1999): Kerala Development Experiences, Institute of Social Sciences, New Delhi, Concept Publishing Company.
35. Oommen, T.K. (1985): From Mobilization to Institutionalization: The Dynamics of Agrarian Movement In Kerala, New Delhi: Popular Prakashan.
36. Panicker, K. N (2009): Colonialism, Culture and Resistance, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
37. Parayil, Govindan (ed.) (2000): Kerala: The Development Experience, London: Zed Books
38. Philip, Cheriyan, (2010) Kalnoottandu, National Book Stall. 
39. Prakash, B.A., Jerry Alwin et al. (eds.) (2018): Kerala’s Economic Development: Emerging Issues and Challenges, New Delhi: Sage.
40. Raman, K. Ravi (ed.) (2010): Development, Democracy and the State: Critiquing the Kerala Model of Development, Abingdon: Routledge.
41. Ramanathaiyer, Sundar and Stewart MacPherson (2019): Social Development in Kerala: Illusion or Reality? Abingdon: Routledge.
42. K. Ramachandran Nair (2006) The History of Trade Union Movement in Kerala, Manak, New Delhi.
43. Sureshkumar, Political Evolution in Kerala: Travancore 1859-1938 Phoenix Publishing House, New Delhi.
44. Tharamangalam, Joseph (ed.) (2006): Kerala: The Paradoxes of Public Action and Development, Hyderabad: Orient Longman.
45. Velayudhan,P. S. (1978) S.N.D.P.Yogacharitram, S.N.D.P.Yogam, Kollam.
46. Zacharia, K.C., P.R.Gopinathan Nair, S.Irudaya Rajan (2006): Return Emigrants in Kerala: Welfare, Rehabilitation and Development, New Delhi: Manohar.
47. Zacharia, K.C., E.T.Mathew and S. Irudaya Rajan (eds.) (2003): Dynamics of Migration in Kerala: Dimensions, Differentials and Consequences, Hyderabad: Orient Longman.