---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 4
course_code: "magap04c15"
course_title: "india-and-the-world"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP04C15: India and the World

## Course Objectives
1. To provide a historical understanding of India’s foreign policy, focusing on key moments, shifts, and developments in its engagement with the world.
2. To critically analyze India’s foreign policy strategies including major doctrines such as the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), Gujral Doctrine, Look East Policy, and Act East Policy.
3. To explore India’s relationships with its neighboring states, both immediate (South Asia) and distant (Central Asia, West Asia, South East Asia), and the implications of these relationships for regional and global stability.
4. To examine the role of non-state actors, including civil society organizations, in shaping India’s foreign policy, and the significance of regional and economic cooperation in the post-Cold War context.

## Course Outcomes
1. Analyze the historical evolution of India’s foreign policy, understanding key phases and shifts in its international engagements and global positioning.
2. Critically assess key foreign policy doctrines and strategies, such as NAM, Gujral Doctrine, Look East, and Act East Policies, and their impact on India’s diplomatic and security posture.
3. Evaluate India’s relationships with its neighboring countries and major global powers, and understand how these relationships influence regional stability and global geopolitics.
4. Understand the growing influence of non-state actors, such as civil society organizations and economic entities, in shaping India’s global interactions and foreign policy decisions.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 India’s Relation with the World: Key features, challenges, and Potentials
1. Historical Legacy (Colonial Period), Key Factors (Ideology, Political, Geo-Politics), Central Feature (Non –Alignment) & India’s Foreign Policy in the Post-Cold War –Strategic Autonomy
2. India’s Foreign Policy: Different Facets (Indira Gandhi’s Foreign Policy- Hard Realism, No First Use Policy, Gujral Doctrine, Look East Policy, Act East Policy, Neighborhood First Policy) & India as an emerging world power -Hard Power and Soft Power Capability

### Module - 2 India and Its Neighbours
1. Immediate Neighborhood – South Asia (Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka)
2. Distant Neighborhood- Central Asia (Afghanistan), West Asia/Middle East (Iran –Israel), South East Asia (Singapore, Australia) 

### Module - 3 India and Major Powers
1. India’s relations with Western Powers: India and USA – Nuclear and Strategic Partnership, India and Russia – Ideological and Military Relations
2. India’s Relations with Asian Powers: India and China – Border relations and Economic imbalances & India and Japan: Strategic Relationship

### Module - 4 India’s Engagement with International Organisations, and Civil Society Actors
1. International Organisation – UNO, WTO
2. Regional, and Economic Cooperation – SAARC, ASEAN, EU, SCO, BRICS, G20
3. India and International NGOs & Indian NGOs and Foreign Policy
4. Indian Diaspora and Foreign Policy

## Reading List
1. Ganguly, Sumit, (2019): Indian Foreign Policy: Oxford India Short Introductions, New Delhi: Oxford University Press. (Chapter. 3)
2. Malone, M David, *et al*., The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy, (2015) Oxford University Press, New Delhi. (Introduction)
3. Mahajan, Sneha, *Foreign Policy of the Raj and its legacy*, Malone, David M. *et al*., (2017): The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
4. Malone, David M., (2014): Does the Elephant Dance? Contemporary Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press. (Chapter 2)
5. **Mohan, C. Raja, *Beyond Non-Alignment* (2013), Bajpai**, Kanti P. and Harsh V. Pant (2013): India’s Foreign Policy: A Reader, New Delhi: Oxford University Press
6. Prasad, Bimal, The Making of India’s Foreign Policy: The Indian National Congress and world Affairs 1885-1947,(2012) Vista Publishing
7. Pande, Aparna (2017): From Chanakya to Modi: Evolution of India's Foreign Policy, New Delhi: HarperCollins (Chapter. 1)
8. Bajpai, Kanti, *Indian Strategic Culture*, 2013, Bajpai, Kanti P. and Harsh V. Pant (2013): India’s Foreign Policy: A Reader, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
9. Cohen, P Stephen, *The world view of India’s strategic elite*, (2013),Bajpai, Kanti P. and Harsh V. Pant (2013): India’s Foreign Policy: A Reader, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
10. Pant, V. Harsh., *Indian strategic culture*: the debate and its consequences,(2011), Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
11. **Nayar, Raj, Baldev and Paul, T.V., *Major-power Status in the Modern World: India in Comparative Perspective***, Bajpai, Kanti P. and Harsh V. Pant (2013): India’s Foreign Policy: A Reader, New Delhi: Oxford University Press
12. Mohan, C. Raja, (2003), Crossing the Rubicon: The Shaping of India’s Foreign Policy, Penguin, New Delhi (Chapter 2&3)
13. Cohen, Stephen P,. (2001) India: Emerging Power, Brookings Institution Press, Washington D.C. (Introduction)
14. Acharya, Amitava: *India’s Look East Policy*, Malone, David M. et al (ed.) (2017): The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press
15. Chacko, Priya (2012), Indian Foreign Policy: The Politics of Postcolonial Identity from 1947 to 2004. New York, Routledge. (Unit 2)
16. Grare, Frederic (2017): India Turns East: International Engagement and US-China Rivalry, New Delhi: Penguin Random House. (Chapter. 3)
17. Kirk, A Jason, The evolution of India’s Nuclear policies, (2010) Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
18. Man, Singh Surjith., *Indira Gandhi Foreign Policy: Hard Realism*, (2015); Malone M David, et al. (2015), The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy.
19. Malone, David M. (2014): Does the Elephant Dance? Contemporary Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press. (Chapter 9)
20. Mohan, C. Raja (2003), Crossing the Rubicon: The Shaping of India’s Foreign Policy, Penguin, New Delhi (Unit 1).
21. Basrur, M Rajesh., (2010): *India-Pakistan Relations: Between War and Peace*, Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi:
22. Bhattarai, Dinesh, (2015): *Changing Dynamics in Nepal-India Relations*, Chandra Vishal (2015): India and South Asia: Exploring Regional Perceptions, New Delhi, Pentagon Press.
23. Chacko, Priya (2012), Indian Foreign Policy: The Politics of Postcolonial Identity from 1947 to 2004. New York, Routledge. (Unit 6)
24. DeVotta, Neil, (2010): *When Individuals, States, and Systems Collide: India's Foreign Policy towards Sri Lanka*, Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
25. Jeganaathan J., India-Sri Lanka Relations in the New Era: Old Challenges, New Vistas, *Indian Foreign Affairs Journal*, Vol. 10, No. 1 (January-March, 2015), pp. 20-25
26. Kumar,Satish, 2011; *India and the Himalayan states*, Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
27. Muni, S D, *India’s Nepal Policy*, (2010; Malone, David M. et al (ed.) (2017): The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
28. Orland, Brian, (2011): *India’s relations with Sri Lanka*, Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
29. Pant, V Harsh.,(2011): *India’s relations with Bangladesh*, Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
30. Scott, David,(2011): *India’s relations with Pakistan*, Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
31. Suryanarayan, V, (2017); *India Sri Lanka Equation: Geography as an opportunity*, David M. et al (ed.) (2017): The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
32. Thakar, Milind, (2010): *Indo-Bangladesh Relations: The Puzzle of Weak Ties*, Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
33. **V. Paul**, (2013); ***Why Has the India-Pakistan Rivalry Been So Enduring? Power Asymmetry and an Intractable Conflict***,Bajpai, Kanti P. and Harsh V. Pant (2013): India’s Foreign Policy: A Reader, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
34. Batabyal, Anindya, (2011), *Looking East 1: South-East Asia and ASEAN*, Ed., Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge.
35. Blarel, Nicolas, Indo-Israeli Relations: Emergence of a Strategic Partnership, Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
36. Fair, C. Christine, Indo-Iranian Relations: What Prospects for Transformation? (2010): Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
37. Grare, Frederic (2017): India Turns East: International Engagement and US-China Rivalry, New Delhi: Penguin Random House. (Chapter 3,5&8)
38. Ladwig, C,Walter., Looking east 2: *East Asia and Australasia/Oceania*, Eds., Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge.
39. Malone, David M. (2014): Does the Elephant Dance? Contemporary Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press. (Chapter 5, 8, &9)
40. Moradian, Davood, *Indo-Afghan Relationship: Afghan Expectations and Indian Reluctance*, Chandra Vishal (2015): India and South Asia: Exploring Regional Perceptions, New Delhi, Pentagon Press.
41. Narvenkar, Mukund (2011), Looking west 1: Iran and the Gulf 167-178, Ed., Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge Pant, Harsh V. (2014): India’s Afghan Muddle: A Lost Opportunity, New Delhi: Harper Collins. (Chapter 2&3)
42. Scott, David.,(2013),India’s *'Extended Neighbourhood' Concept: Power Projection for a Rising Power*, Bajpai, Kanti P. and Harsh V. Pant (2013): India’s Foreign Policy: A Reader, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
43. Sharma, Raghav, *India’s relations with Afghanistan*, Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
44. Shekhar,Vibhanshu, India-Singapore Relations: An Overview, *Institute Of Peace And Conflict Studies* (Jun. 1, 2007). 
45. Jain, B M.,(2016); India US Relations in the Age of Uncertainty: An uneasy courtship (Chapter1,3,4&5)
46. Kapur, S. Paul., *India and the United States from World War II to the Present: A Relationship Transformed*, Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
47. Malone, David M. (2014): Does the Elephant Dance? Contemporary Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press. (Chapter 7)
48. Mohan, C. Raja (2003), Crossing the Rubicon: The Shaping of India’s Foreign Policy, Penguin, New Delhi.(Chapter 4)`
49. Pant, V Harsh., The India-US Nuclear Pact: Policy, Process, and Great Power Politics, *Asian Security*, Volume, 5, Issue 3, 2009.
50. Tellis, Ashley, *U S India Relations: Struggle for Enduring Partnership*, Malone M David, et al., (2015), The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy. Oxford University Press.
51. Budhwar, K Prem., India-Russia Relations: Past, Present and the Future, *India Quarterly*, Vol. 63, No. 3 (July-September, 2007), pp. 51-83
52. Chandra, Rekha, 2017: India- Russia post-cold war Relations: A New epoch of cooperation, Routledge. (Chapter1,2, &3)
53. Menon, Rajan., *The Russian Federation: The Anatomy and evolution of a Relationship*, (2015), 54. Malone M David, et al.,(2015), The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy.
55. Ollapally,M, Deepa., (2010): *The Evolution of India's Relations with Russia: Tried, Tested, and Searching for Balance*, Ganguly, Sumit (ed.) (2010): India's Foreign Policy: Retrospect and Prospect, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
56. Bajpai, Kanti.,(2021), India versus China: Why they are not Friends, Juggernaut.
57. Baladas, Ghoshal, India and China: Towards a Competitive-Cooperative Relationship? *Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies* (Aug. 1, 2010)
58. Deepak, B R., (2017): India and China Beyond the Binary of Friendship and enmity, New Delhi, Springer. (Chapter 1,2,& 6)
59. Vijay, Gokhale, The India-China-U.S. Triangle, The Road from Galwan:: The Future of India-China Relations, *Carnegie Endowment for International Peace* (Mar. 1, 2021)
60. Smith, David (2007) The Dragon and the Elephant: China, India and the New World Order: Profile Books, London.
61. Panda, Rajaram , “Towards A New Asian Security Architecture?: India And Japan”, *Institute Of Peace And Conflict Studies* (Jun. 1, 2013)
62. Ghosh,Madhuchanda , “India And Japan's Growing Synergy: From A Political To A Strategic Focus”,*Asian Survey*, Vol. 48, No. 2 (March/April 2008), Pp. 282-302.
63. Bhagavan., Manu., *“India and United Nations: things Fall apart”*, Malone M David, et al., (2015), The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy.
64. Kirk, Jason, *“India and the International Financial Institutions”*, Malone M David, et al,(2015), The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy.
65. Mehta, S Pradeep., Chatterjee, Bipul, “India in the International Trading System”, Malone M David, et al., (2015), The Oxford Handbook of India’s Foreign Policy
66. Madan, Kumar Davinder., “WTO And The Developing Countries”, *India Quarterly*, Vol. 56, No.3/4 (July-Dec. 2000), Pp. 53-60
67. Murthy, C.S.R, “India in the United Nations Interplay of interests and Principles”, 2020, *Sage Publications*, New Delhi.
68. Pratap Ravindra , “WTO and Rules of Origin: Issues for India”, *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 38, No. 33 (Aug. 16-22, 2003), pp. 3454-3456. 
69. Thakur, Pradeep, “India and the UN”, *Taylor and Francis Strategic Analysis*, 35, No6, 2011, Pp., 890-905
70. Anand, Mohit , India-ASEAN Relations: Analysing Regional Implications, Institute Of Peace And Conflict Studies (May. 1, 2009)
71. Bhaswati Mukherjee, “A New Paradigm in India-EU Relations”, Indian Foreign Affairs Journal, Vol. 12, No. 3 (July-September, 2017), pp. 215-226
72. Chakma, Bhumitra , “Beyond SAARC: Sub-Regional and Trans-Regional Cooperation” South Asian Regionalism: The Limits of Cooperation” , Bristol University Press (2020)Edition: 1(pp. 121-136).
73. DSouza Mariet., Routray Prasad, Bibhu , *“India in BRICS and Indo-GCC Relations: Assessing Conflicts and Complementarities”* Edited by Tim Niblock, ,Degang Sun, Alejandra Galindo., “TheArab States of the Gulf and BRICS: New Strategic Partnerships in Politics and Economics, Gulf Studies”, 2016. (pp. 154-171). 
74. Gupta,Biswanath , Raju KD, “Space Exploration By India And Socio-Economic Cooperation With SAARC Countries”, , *India Quarterly*, Vol. 72, No. 3 (September 2016), Pp. 278-289
75. Jain, Romi , “India And SAARC: An Analysis”, *Indian Journal Of Asian Affairs*, Vol. 18, No.  (December 2005), Pp. 55-74. 
76. Kripalini, Manjeet (Eds)., “India in the G20: Rule taker to Rule Maker”, 2021, Routledge India. (Chapter 3&4)
77. Kumar, S.Y. Surendra, “India and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization: Issues and Concerns”, *International Journal of China Studies India and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization* 343 Vol. 4, No. 3, December 2013, pp. 343-359.
78. Kumar, Yogendra , “India and G-20”, *Indian Foreign Affairs Journal*, Vol. 7, No. 4 (October-December2012), pp. 406-422
79. Roy, Singh., “India's Options in the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation”, *Strategic Analysis, Volume 36, 2012-issue 4*.
80. Salzman, S Rachel. , *“BRICS from Other Perspectives: The Views from India and China”* .,(pp. 118-137)., Rachel S. Salzman, Russia, BRICS, and the Disruption of Global Order, Georgetown University Press, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvcj2sb2, 2019. 
81. Wagner,Christian , “The EU and India: a deepening partnership”, *European Union Institute for Security Studies* (EUISS) (May. 1, 2008)
82. Amnesty International - https://www.amnesty.org/en/location/asia-and-the-pacific/south-asia/india/
83. Human Rights watch - https://www.hrw.org/tag/kashmir
84. Sukanya, Shanta, “Amnesty International India shuts Down, and Blames the Government”, The wire, 25 September 2020, https://thewire.in/rights/amnesty-international-india-shuts-down-inquiriesinvestigating-agencies-ed-cbi
85. Malik, Ashok, Rory Medcalf., *India’s New World: Civil Society in the Making of Foreign Policy*, Lowy institute for institute Foreign Policy, May 2011. 
86. Gupta, Shagun, (2015)., Role of Civil Society in shaping India’s Development Partnership, University of Oxford,
87. Chanana, D. (2009). India as an emerging donor. *Economic and Political Weekly*, 44(12), 11-14.
88. Raphaëlle, Khan, Patrick Köllner., Foreign Policy Think Tanks in India: New Actors, Divergent Profiles, Research Report, *German Institute of Global and Area Studies* (GIGA) (Feb. 1, 2018)
89. Abraham, Itty, (2014): “– Diaspora as Foreign Policy” in *How India Became Territorial: Foreign policy, Diaspora, Geopolitics*, Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 73-106.Chapter Niranjan, Desai, India and its Diaspora, *Indian Foreign Af airs Journal*, Vol. 1, No. 4 (October-December, 2006), pp. 94-108
90. Kapur, Devesh (ed), *“The Indian Diaspora and Indian Foreign Policy: Soft Power or Soft Underbelly?”* (pp. 185-209). Devesh Kapur., Diaspora, Development, and Democracy: TheDomestic Impact of International Migration from India, Princeton University Press (2010).

### Suggested Readings
1. Ghosh, Anjali (2009): A History of India’s Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Pearson
2. Koshy, Ninan. (2006): Under the Empire India’s New Foreign Policy, Left Word Books.
3. Malone, David M. (2014): Does the Elephant Dance? Contemporary Indian Foreign Policy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
4. Chandran, Suba and Jabin T. Jacob (2011): India’s Foreign Policy: Old Problems, New Challenges, New York: Macmillan.
5. Khilnani, Sunil et al. (2014): Non-Alignment 2.0: A Foreign and Strategic Policy for India in the 21st Century, New Delhi: Viking.
6. Harshe, Rajen and K.M.Seethi (eds.) (2005): Engaging with the World: Critical Reflections on India’s Foreign Policy, Hyderabad: Orient Longman.
7. Brass, Paul R, (2010), South Asian Politics: India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Nepal, Routledge, London
8. Chandra, Vishal, (2015), India and South Asia: Exploring Regional Perceptions, New Delhi, Pentagon Press.
9. Dittmerm Lowell,(ed). (2014), South Asia's Nuclear Security Dilemma: India, Pakistan, and China, Routledge, New York
10. Dixit J N, (2010): India’s Foreign Policy and its Neighbours, Gyan Publishing House
11. Ganguly, Sumit, and S Paul, Kapur, (2012), India, Pakistan, and the Bomb: Debating Nuclear Stability in South Asia, Columbia University Press, New York
12. Ludden, David, 2002: India and South Asia: A short history: One world publications.
13. Menon Shivashankar 2021): India and Asian Geo Politics: The Past, Present, Brookings Institution.
14. Scott, David (2011): Handbook of India’s International Relations, London: Routledge
15. Wolpert, Stanley (2011): India and Pakistan: Continuous conflict and cooperation: University of California Press.
16. Chandhoke, Neera, Global Civil Society and Global Justice, Economic and Political weekly, VOL.42, No29, July 21-27, 2007,Pp 3016-3022
17. Giri, Kumar, Anand, “Rethinking Civil society and the Public Spheres: Pathways of Indian Modernities in Global conversations”, *Polish Sociological Review*, No. 178, 2012, PP 227-243
18. Pratap, Abhishek , “Greenpeace and Development”, Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. 49, No. 25 (JUNE 21, 2014), pp. 4-5
19. Srinath, P. (2013) Infographic: Foreign Aid going out of India, Pragati: The Indian National Interest Review, pragati.nationalinterest.in (accessed on 17 March 2013)
20. Suresh, R ,(2009) Foreign Policy and Human Rights: An Indian Perspective, Madhav Books. Gurgaon.