---
country: "india"
university: "cusat"
branch: "msc-environmental-science-and-technology"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "24-360-0104"
course_title: "programming-&-statistics"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# 24-360-0104: PROGRAMMING & STATISTICS

## Course Objectives
* The main objective of this course is to provide students a basic understanding the principles of computers and computer programming. They should readily use the object-oriented programming and apply various data types and control sequences. Students should be capable of doing statistical analysis and data analysis on environmental data sets.


## Course Outcomes
* **CO 1:** Discuss the basics of programming and interfacing in computer programming.
* **CO 2:** Interpret the various data types and operations in programming.
* **CO 3:** Execute codes using modules and functions in object-oriented programming.
* **CO 4:** Operate the fundamental statistical analysis on environmental data sets.
* **CO 5:** Examine basic data analysis and visualisation of environmental data.


## Course Content

### Module - I Introduction to Programming
* Basic principles of computers; Relations between computers and programs; Compilers and Interpreters; History of Programming languages; Concepts of programming; Steps involved in developing a program; Object-oriented programming; Introduction to Python Programming; Installing Python; Different methods of using Python; inputs and outputs

### Module - II Data types and control structures
* Operators; Data types; variables; expressions; statements; assignment statements; strings and string operations; Control structures- conditional and decision making- loops

### Module - III Modules and Functions
* Standard Modules; Libraries; Pandas-NumPy-SciPy; Packages; Create a module; Function parameters; Variable arguments; Scope of Function-Documentation; Create a Function

### Module - IV Data Handling and Visualization
* File handling; Reading from file; Writing to file; Data structures- Array- List-Dictionary; Error processing; Exceptions; visualistion with Matplotlib

### Module - V Statistical Analysis
* Python statistic libraries; Descreiptive Statistics- Central tendency-Varibility-Correlation; Visualisation; Axes; DataFrames; Histograms; Pie Charts;Box Plots; Bar Charts; XY Plots

## References
1. Martin C. Brown, “Python: The Complete Reference”, 2018, Mc Graw Hill.
2. Allen Downey, “Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist”, 2016, Green Tea Press, Needham, Massachusetts.
3. Charles R Severance, “Python for Everybody Exploring Data Using Pythons 3”, 2017, Python Learn.
4. Allen B. Downey, “Think Stats: Exploratory Data Analysis in Python”, 2014, Green Tea Press, Needham, Massachusetts.
5. For installation and basic codes: www.python.org
6. For Python Tutorials : https://www.w3schools.com/python/