---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht413"
course_title: "food-processing-and-technology"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT413: Food Processing and Technology

## Course Objectives

- Explain the importance of food quality, nutritive aspects, food additives and standards
- Discuss the food processing and packing methods
- Select suitable food preservation techniques
- Explain the production and utilization of food products from diary, meat, poultry and fish industries
- Describe treatment and disposal of food processing wastes

## Course Content

### Module - 1: General aspects, food constituents, food additives and food deterioration (6 Hrs.)

- General aspects of food industry World and Indian food needs Various food constituents and additives Food deteriorative factors and their control.

### Module - 2: Food processing (7 Hrs.)

- Preliminary processing methods. Unit operations in Food Processing. Food conversion techniques and equipment used Food quality control and nutritive aspects

### Module - 3: Food preservation and packing techniques (7 Hrs.)

- Hot and cold preservation techniques Irradiation and microwave heating Fermentation and Pickling, packing methods

### Module - 4: Cereals, pulses, vegetables, fats and oils (7 Hrs.)

- Production and processing of cereals, pulses, Production and processing of vegetables, spices fats and oils

### Module - 5: Food Industries and safe disposal of wastes (8 Hrs.)

- Food industries - Diary products, meat, poultry and fish products, Beverage Industry- Soft and Alcoholic. Treatment and disposal of food processing wastes

## References

- B.Sivasankar, _Food Processing and Preservation_, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
- Badger, W.L, Banchero, J.T., _Introduction to Chemical Engineering_, McGraw Hill.
- Food Industry Wastes: Disposal and Recovery; Herzka A & Booth RG; 1981, Applied Science Pub Ltd.
- Hall C.W, Farall A.W & Rippen A.L, _Encyclopedia of Food Engineering_, Van Nostrand, Reinhold, New York.
- Heid J.L & Joslyn M.A, _Fundamentals of Food Processing Operations_, AVI Pub.
- Unit Operations of Chemical Engineering: McCabe, Smith & Harriot, TMH, 5th edition.
- V. Sathe, _A First Course in Food Analysis_, New Age International Pvt. Ltd. 1999.
- Waston E.L., _Elements of Food Engineering_, Van Nostrand, Reinhold, New York.
