---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht473"
course_title: "fluidization-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT473: Fluidization Engineering

## Course Objectives

- Demonstrate the fluidized bed behaviour and various industrial application of fluidization.
- Illustrate fluidization regimes and different empirical correlations for pressure drop, hold up, and different flow models.
- Explain the bubbling bed model of fluidized beds and describe the K-L bubbling model.
- Explain the Heat and Mass Transfer in fluidized beds.
- Design a fluidized bed system for different applications.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Introduction and Industrial Applications (7 hours)

- **Introduction:** The Phenomenon of Fluidization, Liquid like Behaviour of a Fluidized Bed Comparison with Other Contacting Methods, Advantages and disadvantages of Fluidized bed for Industrial Operations, Fluidization Quality, Selection of Contacting Mode for Given Application.
- **Industrial application of Fluidized beds:** Physical operations - Synthesis reaction, cracking and reforming of hydrocarbons, gasification, carbonization, gas-solid reactions, calcining and clinkering.

### Module - 2: Fluidization and Mapping of Regimes

- Fluidization and Mapping of Regimes: Distributors, Gas jets in fluidized beds, Pressure drop in fixed beds, Geldart classification of particles, Gas fluidization with and without entrainment, Mapping of fluidization regimes. Distributor types, Pressure drop requirements across distributors. Design of gas distributors. Power consumption.

### Module - 3: Bubble and Emulsion Phase Analysis

- Analysis of bubble and emulsion phase - Davidson's model, frequency measurements, bubbles in ordinary bubbling bed model for bubble phase and emulsion phase - Experimental findings - Turnover rate of solids - Bubbling bed model for emulsion phase - Interchange coefficient. Flow Pattern of Gas, Heat and Mass Transfer in Fluidized Beds - Flow pattern of gas through fluidized beds - Experimental findings - The bubbling bed model for Gas inter change Interpretation of Gas mixing data.

### Module - 4: Heat and Mass Transfer

- Heat and Mass Transfer between fluid and solid. Experiment findings on Heat and Mass Transfer - Heat and Mass Transfer rates from bubbling bed model. Heat transfer between fluidized beds and surface - Experiment finding theories of bed heat transfer comparison of theories.

### Module - 5: Design Applications

- Design for physical operations: Heat transfer, mass transfer, Design of Catalytic Reactors. Design of Non catalytic Gas-solid reactors

## References

- Kunii, D. and Levenspiel, O., _Fluidization Engineering_, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
- Leva, M., _Fluidization_, McGraw-Hill
- Davidson, J.F. and Harrison, D., _Fluidized Particle_, Cambridge University Press
- J.H. Perry, _Chemical Engineering Hand Book_, 3rd Edition.
- McCabe & Smith, _Unit operation of Chemical Engineering_
