---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht425"
course_title: "petroleum-resources-and-petrochemicals"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT425: Petroleum Resources and Petrochemicals

## Course Objectives

- Understand the fundamentals of petroleum geology and exploration.
- Summarize the basics of logging, drilling and production techniques practiced in the oil wells.
- Outline the geology, origin, reservoir characteristics and production technology of unconventional oil.
- Outline the geology, origin, reservoir characteristics and production technology of unconventional gases.
- Understand various petrochemical feedstocks and summarize the production of various petrochemicals.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Fundamentals of petroleum geology (7 hrs)

- Introduction, origin, formation, geological occurrence and characteristics of oil and natural gas. Source Rocks, Reservoir Rocks, and Cap rocks: Definition, Characteristics, Classification and nomenclature, Concept of Shale oil, Reservoir Properties, Hydrocarbon migration.

### Module - 2: Introduction to exploration, well drilling and production

- Petroleum Exploration, Well logging: Logging Terminology-Borehole environment- Major components of well logging unit and logging setup- Classification of well logging methods. Well Drilling: cable tool drilling, rotary drilling, types of drilling units, and types of production units. Well completion, Production methods.

### Module - 3: Introduction to non-conventional oil

- **Shale oil:** Introduction, geology, origin, types of oil shales, and occurrence worldwide, Kerogen and its composition, production technologies.
- **Tar Sand:** Introduction, geology, origin and occurrence worldwide, composition, resources.
- **Heavy oil:** Introduction, geology, origin and occurrence worldwide, composition and production technologies.

### Module - 4: Introduction to non-conventional gas

- Introduction, present status, formation and properties of coal bed methane, natural gas hydrate, tight gas sands, shale gas. Shale Gas: Exploration, Production-hydrofracking, Drilling and completion.

### Module - 5: Introduction to Petrochemicals

- Petrochemical Industries & their feed stocks, Major Petrochemical products and their applications. First, Second and Third generation petrochemical products, Production of Acetylene, Ethylene and Propylene by steam cracking of Naphtha, Manufacture of Caprolactum from Benzene, Manufacture of Poly ethylene, P.V.C, Poly propylene.

## References

- Elements of Petroleum Geology, Richard, C. Selley, Elsevier, 1997
- Dake L. P., _Fundamentals of Reservoir Engineering_, Elsevier Science B. V, 1978
- Manjooran S. K. B., _Modern Petroleum Chemistry_, Kannatheri Publication, 2004
- Beggs D. H., _Gas Production Operations_, OGCI Publications, 1984
- Petroleum Production Engineering: A Computer Assisted Approach, BoyunGuo, William C. Lyons, Ali Ghalambor, Elesevier Science & Technology Books, 2007.
- James G. Speight, _Shale Oil Production Processes_, Gulf Professional Publishing, 2012
- Carrol John, _Natural Gas Hydrates: A guide for engineers_, Gulf Professional Publishing, 2003
- Rafiqul Islam, M., _Unconventional Gas Reservoirs: Evaluation, Appraisal, and Development_, Gulf Professional Publishing, 2014
- Advanced Petrochemicals: Dr. G. N. Sarkar, Khanna Publishers
- A Text on Petrochemicals: B.K.B. Rao, Khanna Pub.
