---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "electrical-and-electronics-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "eet332"
course_title: "computer-organization"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# EET332: Computer Organization  

## Course Objectives  
* Identify the functional units of a digital computer and understand the bus structure for data transfer.  
* Identify the pros and cons of different types of control unit design for various architectures.  
* Explain the principle of operation of ALU for typical arithmetic and logic operations.  
* Identify memory organization, cache memory and virtual memory techniques.  
* Select appropriate interfacing standards for I/O devices.  

## Modules  

### Module 1 – Basic Structure of Computers  
* Functional units – Von Neumann architecture – basic operational concepts.  
* Introduction to buses – measuring performance, evaluating and comparing.  
* Instruction representation – formats, operands, addressing modes.  
* Instruction set architectures – CISC and RISC architectures.  

### Module 2 – Processor and Control Unit  
* Fundamental concepts – multiple bus organization of CPU.  
* Memory read and write operations – data transfer using registers.  
* Execution of a complete instruction – sequencing of control signals.  
* Hardwired and microprogrammed control.  

### Module 3 – Data Representation and Arithmetic  
* Signed number representation, fixed and floating point representations.  
* Character representation.  
* Computer arithmetic – integer addition and subtraction, Booth’s multiplication.  
* Division – restoring and non-restoring techniques.  

### Module 4 – Memory Organization and Pipelining  
* Memory cells – basic organization.  
* Memory hierarchy – caches, cache performance.  
* Virtual memory – common framework for memory hierarchies.  
* Introduction to pipelining – pipeline hazards.  

### Module 5 – Input/Output Organization  
* Characteristics of I/O devices – data transfer schemes.  
* Programmed and interrupt-controlled I/O transfer.  
* Organization of interrupts – vectored interrupts, servicing multiple devices.  
* Polling and daisy chaining schemes.  
* Direct memory access (DMA).  

## References  
* Hamacher C., Z. Vranesic, S. Zaky – *Computer Organization*, 5/e, McGraw Hill, 2011.  
* William Stallings – *Computer Organization and Architecture: Designing for Performance*, Pearson, 9/e, 2013.  
* Patterson D. A., Hennessey J. L. – *Computer Organization and Design*, 5/e, Morgan Kaufmann, 2013.  
* Heuring V. P., Jordan H. F. – *Computer System Design and Architecture*, Addison Wesley, 2/e.  
