---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "pcaot403"
course_title: "aircraft-structures-1"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PCAOT403 - Aircraft Structures -1

## Course Objectives

1.  To perform **stress and deformation analysis** on common structural members in aircraft.
2.  To practice various methods for **analysis of stresses** in structural members.
3.  To describe the **theories of failure** employed in the analysis of structural elements.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Statically Determinate and Indeterminate Structures

-   Introduction to aircraft structural components and general loads.
-   **Plane Truss Analysis** using the Method of Joints, Method of Sections, and Method of Shear.
-   Analysis of indeterminate beams using **Clapeyron’s 3-moment equation** and the moment distribution method.

### Module 2: Energy Methods

-   Principle of Virtual Work and **Maxwell’s Reciprocal Theorem**.
-   **Strain Energy** calculations for axial, bending, torsion, and shear loadings.
-   Application of **Castigliano’s theorems** to determine deflections in beams, frames, and trusses.
- Energy methods applied
to statically determinate and indeterminate beams- dummy load & unit
load methods, frames, rings & trusses. 

### Module 3: Column Analysis

-   **Euler’s column theory** for buckling, including inelastic buckling and the effect of initial curvature.
-   Analysis of columns with eccentricity using the **Rankine formula**.
-   Introduction to the theory of **beam-columns**.

### Module 4: Theories of Failure and Material Behavior

-   Study of various **theories of failure**, including maximum principal stress, maximum shear stress, and maximum strain energy theories.
-   Introduction to **thermal stresses**, impact loading, **Fatigue**, and **Creep**.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicles Structures* – Bruhn. E.H, Tri- state off-set Company, 1985
-   *Aircraft Structures for Engineering Students* – Megson T M G, Elsevier Ltd, 2012
-   *Aircraft Structures* – Peery, D.J., and Azar, J.J., McGraw Hill, 2nd edition, 1999
-   *Airframe structural Design* – Michael Chun-Yung Niu, Conmilit Press Ltd, 1998
-   *Fundamentals of Aircraft Structural Analysis* – Howard D Curtis, WCB- McGraw Hill, 1997
-   *Theory and Analysis of Flight Structures* – Rivello, R.M., McGraw Hill, 1993

---
