---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "physical-science"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "gcmat401"
course_title: "mathematics-for-physical-science-4"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# GCMAT401: Mathematics for Physical Science - 4

## Course Objectives
1. To familiarize students with the foundations of probabilistic and statistical analysis mostly used in varied applications in engineering and science.
2. To provide the students with the basics of various numerical methods to develop problem solving skills used in various engineering disciplines.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1: Discrete Random Variables and Probability Distributions
- Random variables, Discrete random variables and their probability distributions.
- Cumulative distribution function, Expectation, Mean and variance.
- Binomial distribution, Poisson distribution, Poisson distribution as a limit of the binomial distribution.
- Joint pmf of two discrete random variables, Marginal pmf, Independent random variables.
- Expected value of a function of two discrete variables.

### Module 2: Continuous Random Variables and Probability Distributions
- Continuous random variables and their probability distributions.
- Cumulative distribution function, Expectation, Mean and variance.
- Uniform, Normal and Exponential distributions.
- Joint pdf of two Continuous random variables, Marginal pdf, Independent random variables.
- Expectation value of a function of two continuous variables.

### Module 3: Statistical Inference
- Confidence Intervals, Confidence Level, and one-sided confidence intervals for a Population Mean (for large and small samples).
- Hypotheses and Test Procedures, Type I and Type II error.
- z-Tests and t-Tests for Hypotheses about a Population Mean (for large and small samples).
- Tests concerning a population proportion for large and small samples.

### Module 4: Numerical Methods
- Solution of Equations: Newton-Raphson Method.
- Solution of Linear Systems: Gauss Elimination Method, Gauss-Jordan Method.
- Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations: Euler's method, Modified Euler's method, Runge Kutta method of $2^{nd}$ Order.
- Numerical solution of Laplace equation: Jacobi's Method.
- Curve Fitting: Method of Least Squares for straight lines and parabolas.

---

## References

- Devore J. L, *Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences*, Cengage Learning, $9^{th}$ edition, 2016.
- S S Sastry, *Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis*, PHI Learning Pvt Limited, $5^{th}$ edition, 2012.
- Papoulis, A. & Pillai, S.U., *Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes*, McGraw Hill, $4^{th}$ edition, 2002.
- Ross, S. M., *Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists*, Academic Press, $6^{th}$ edition, 2020.
- Steven C. Chapra, Raymond P. Canale, *Numerical methods for Engineers*, McGraw Hill Education, $8^{th}$ edition, 2021.
