---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "pbcet404"
course_title: "design-of-concrete-structures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# PBCET404: DESIGN OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES

## Course Objectives
1. Analyse reinforced concrete sections for the purpose of design.
2. Design of structural members ensuring safety and serviceability.
3. Prepare structural drawings of various elements of a framed structure.
4. Analyse and design of a framed RCC structure using software.
5. Solve a real field structural design problem.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1
- **Properties of Concrete and Steel:** Philosophies of Design by Limit State Method, Introduction of IS 456:2000 design provisions.
- **Limit State of Collapse in Flexure:** Singly Reinforced Rectangular Beams.
- **Computation of Parameters of Governing Equations:** Determination of Neutral Axis Depth and Computation of Moment of Resistance- Numerical Problems.
- **Limit State of Collapse in Shear:** Numerical Problems, Bond, Anchorage, Development Length and Splicing.
- **Torsion in Beams:** Limit State of Collapse, Numerical Problems on design and analysis of Singly Reinforced Rectangular Beams.

### Module 2
- **Doubly Reinforced Beams:** Theory and Problems, Flanged Beams - Theory and IS Code provisions only.
- **One-way slabs:** Basic Principles, Theory and design - Numerical Problems.
- **Design of Two-way Slabs:** Numerical Problems.

### Module 3
- **Limit State of Serviceability:** Introduction to IS code provisions only.
- **Compression members:** Definitions, Classifications, Guidelines and Assumptions, modes of failure.
- **Analysis of Short Axially Loaded Compression Members:** under Axial Load with Uniaxial Bending & Biaxial bending - Numerical Problems.
- **Design of Short Columns:** under Axial Load with Uniaxial Bending & Biaxial bending - Numerical Problems.

### Module 4
- **Foundations:** Shallow foundations, isolated foundations, Design of square and rectangular foundation- Numerical Problems (Only axially loaded condition is expected).
- **Modelling and design of a simple framed structure:** in any structural analysis and design software (Example: A double storied structure with three rooms in GF and FF).

---

## References
1. B.C Punmia, Ashok Kumar Jain, Arun Kumar Jain, *Limit Sate Design of Reinforced Concrete*, Laxmi Publications, 10th Edition, 2015.
2. Ravi Kumar Sharma, Rachit Sharma, *Reinforced Concrete Design*, BS Publications, 2021.
3. JN Bandyopadhyay, *Design of Concrete Structures*, PHI Learning Private Limited, 2008.
4. N Krishna Raju, RN Pranesh, *Reinforced Concrete Design - Principles and Practice*, New Age International Publishers, 2007.
5. ML Gambhir, *Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures*, PHI Learning Private Limited, 4th Edition, 2011.
6. Ramchandra, Virendra Gehlot, *Limit State Design of Concrete Structures*, Scientific Publishers (India), 3rd Edition, 2018.
7. PC Varghese, *Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete*, PHI Learning Private Limited, 2008.
8. P Dayaratnam, *Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures*, CBS Publishers, 2017.
9. Arthur H Nilson, David Darwin, Charles William Dolan, *Design of concrete structures*, McGraw Hill, 2010.
10. N. Subramanian, *Design of reinforced concrete structures*, Oxford university press, 2013.
11. Relevant IS Codes: IS 456, IS 875, SP 16, SP34 etc. (Refer the latest updates and download from the official website of bureau of Indian standards).
