---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 5
course_code: "pcaot502"
course_title: "aircraft-structures-2"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# PCAOT502 - Aircraft Structures –II

## Course Objectives

1.  To analyse the **stress and strain** in major aircraft structural components such as **aircraft wings and fuselage**.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Bending of Thick & Thin-Walled Beams

-   Analysis of **symmetrical and unsymmetrical bending** in various cross-sections.
-   Calculation of bending stresses in thick and thin-walled beams using the **generalized k-method**.
-   Application of **principal axis** and **neutral axis** methods.

### Module 2: Shear Flow in Open Sections

-   Introduction to the concept of **shear flow** in thin-walled beams.
-   Calculation of shear flow distribution in symmetrical and unsymmetrical open sections.
-   Determination of the **shear center** and analysis of idealized sections.

### Module 3: Shear Flow in Closed Sections

-   Application of the **Bredt-Batho theory** for torsion in closed sections.
-   Determination of the shear center for closed sections.
-   Analysis of **single and multi-cell tubes** subject to combined bending and torsion.

### Module 4: Thin Plates and Stress Analysis

-   Introduction to the **buckling of plates** and calculation of crippling stresses using **Needham’s and Gerard’s methods**.
-   **Stress analysis of aircraft components** like wings and fuselage, using concepts like the **V-n diagram**.
-   Introduction to **tension field web beams (Wagner’s beams)**.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Aircraft Structures* – Peery, D.J., and Azar, J.J., McGraw–Hill, 2013
-   *Airframe structural Design* – Michael Chun-Yung Niu, Conmilit Press Ltd, 1998
-   *Theory and Analysis of Flight Structures* – Rivello, R.M., McGraw Hill, 1993
-   *Fundamentals of Aircraft Structural Analysis* – Howard D Curtis, WCB- McGraw Hill, 1997
-   *Analysis and Design of Flight Vehicles Structures* – Bruhn. E.H., Tri-state off-set Company, 1985
-   *Aircraft Structures for Engineering Students* – Megson T M G, Elsevier Ltd, 2012

---
