---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "sw1641"
course_title: "planning-social-projects"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1641: Planning Social Projects 

## Course Objectives
* To provide basic knowledge in project management.
* To help the students to acquire skill in preparation, management, monitoring and evaluation of projects.
* To equip the students to write independent project proposals.

## Course Content
### Module I - Introduction to Project Planning
* Project-Definition, Features, Types of Projects
* Advantages of Project Planning
* People’s Participation in Project Planning and Management
* Stages/Levels of Participation

### Module II - Steps in participatory project planning
* Project Cycle 
* Identifying Needs, Determining Priorities
* Using PRA/PLA Methods for Need Identification and Prioritization
* Feasibility Assessment
* Formulating Goals and Objectives in a Project 
* Preparing Action Plan/Activity Schedule Including Action, Responsibility, Time and Cost

### Module III - Monitoring and Evaluation of project
* Monitoring-Definition, Steps in Monitoring, Levels of Monitoring,
* Evaluation- Definition, Types of Evaluation, Criteria for Evaluation, Steps in Evaluation Process, Difference Between Monitoring and Evaluation
* Overview of Project Planning Tools: Logical Framework Approach (LFA), Critical Path Method (CPM), Project Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT)

### Module IV - Financial Management of a project
* Fund Raising Methods: Community Resource Mobilization, Fund Raising Techniques, Possibilities of Grant-In-Aid from State/Central Governments and LSGs, Funding Agencies – National And International
* Laws and Rules Regarding Fund Raising – 80 G, 12 A, FCRA 35AC OF IT ACT
* Budgeting – Line Item Budgeting, Functional Budgeting, Programme Budgeting
* Social Cost Benefit Analysis

### Module V - Project Proposal Writing Workshop
* Project Title, Introduction, Objectives, Project Beneficiaries, Activities of the Project
* Strategy of Implementation, Budget/Cost Plan, Itemized Budget, Monitoring Conclusion 

## References
1. Mukherjee, Neela, 1993, Participatory Rural Appraisal, Methodology and Applications, Concept Publishing Company, New Delhi (M2).
2. Roy, Sam M (2002), Project Planning and Management: Focusing on Proposal Writing. Health Association for All, Secunderabad.
3. Roy, Sam M (2003), Making Development Organizations Perform. Health Association for All, Secanderabad.