---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "sw1643"
course_title: "social-work-practice-with-family-and-children"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1643: Social Work Practice with Family and Children

## Course Objectives
* To familiarise with various aspects related to family life.
* To equip students with the skills to deal with problems in families.

## Course Content
### Module I - Social Work Practice with Families
* Family: Meaning and Definition
* Changing Trends in Families In India: Single Parent Families, Divorced Parent With Children, Separation, Both Parent Working Families, Care Taker Families
* Family Social Work: Meaning, Definition, Historical Development Of Family Social Work, Assumptions In Family Social Work, Principles Of Family Social Work 

### Module II - Perspectives in Working with Families
* Lifespan Approach to Family- Characteristics, Goals, Needs, Tasks and Problems of each Stage in the Family Life Cycle; Variations Affecting the Life Cycle
* System Perspective, Structural Perspective and Feminist Perspective
* Parenting: Definition, Types and Skills for Effective Parenting
* Family Assessment : Meaning and Definition, Qualitative Techniques : Genogram and Eco Map

### Module III - Family Life Education
* Family Life Education: Meaning, Definition And Characteristics
* Family Life Education- Preventive, Education And Collaborative Strategy The Contents Of Family Life Education: Internal Dynamics Of Families, Human Sexuality, Family Planning, Family Resource Management, Parental Education  

### Module IV - Policies and Programmes for Children
* Introduction to Child Rights: Meaning, Definition and UNCRC
* The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, (2006,2015): Definition of Care and Protection, Classification of Children (in Need of Care and Protection and in Conflict with Law), Juvenile Justice Board: Procedure with Children in Conflict with Law, Child Welfare Committee: Procedure with Children in Need of Care and Protection
* Programmes for Children: ICPS And ICDS

### Module V - Social Work with Children
* Engagement and Assessment: Meaning
* Assessment Tools: Interviewing; Supportive Techniques: Home Visits, Collateral Contacts and Referrals
* School Based Practice : Definition of School Social Work
* Problems of Children: Conduct Disorder, ADHD, Learning Disability- Meaning and Types
* Intervention: Bio-Psychosocial Approach, Child Centred Intervention, Integrated Child and Family Model, Group Work with Children; Play and Relaxation Therapy: Meaning and Techniques

## References
1. Olson, D., DeFrain, J. & Skogrand, L. (2011). Marriages & families : intimacy, diversity, and strengths. New York: McGraw-Hill.
2. Webb, N. (2003). Social work practice with children. New York, N.Y: Guilford Press.
3. Margaret W Matlin – Psychology of women.
4. F Philip Rice – The adolescent development, relationship and culture.
5. Krishna Chakraborthy – Family in India.
6. Masters & Johnson – Human Sexual response.
7. Aruna Khasgiwala – Family Dynamics.
8. John Gray – Men are from Mars and Women are from Venus.