---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "sw1661.b"
course_title: "national-service-scheme"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1661.B: National Service Scheme

## Course Objectives
* To introduce the basic concepts and activities of NSS to the learner.
* To enable the learner to strengthen life competences.
* To make known about social service activities, community mobilization and voluntarism.

## Course Content
### Module I - Introduction to National service scheme (NSS)
* NSS : Aims, objectives and organizational structure
* NSS : Emblem, logo, Song-meaning
* Organizational structure (from national to school level)
* Roles and responsibilities of various NSS functionaries
* Procedures for student members, programme officers, programme coordinators: camp and training  

### Module II - NSS Activities
* Concept of regular activities, special camping, Day Camps and observance of relevance of Important Days recognized by UNO & GOI
* Basis of adoption of village/slums, methodology of conduction survey
* Financial pattern of the scheme
* Coordination with different agencies
* Maintenance of the Diary
* Programme planning: concepts and features 

### Module III - Community Mobilization
* Mapping of Community Stakeholders
* Designing the message in the context of the problem and the culture of the community
* Identifying methods of Mobilization
* Youth-Adult Partnership 

### Module IV - Voluntarism and Shramdan
* Indian Tradition of Volunteerism
* Needs & importance of Volunteerism
* Motivation and Constraints of Volunteerism
* Shramdan as a part of Volunteerism, Role of NSS Volunteers in Swatch Bharat Abhiyan

### Module V - Life Competence
* Definition, Importance
* Communication
* Interpersonal Relations
* Problem Solving
* Develop Self Confidence 

## References
1. National Service Scheme Manual (Revised) 2006, Government of India, Ministry or Youth Affairs and Sports, New Delhi.
2. Rashtriya Seva Yojana Sankalpana – Prof. Dr. Sankay Chakane, Dr. Promad \ Prabhakar, Diamond Publication, Pune.
3. New Trends in NSS, Research papers published by University of Pune.
4. Training Manual for Field Work published by RGNIYD, Shreeperumbuduer.
5. Prof. Ghatole R.N. Rural Social Science and Community Development.
6. Purushottam Sheth , Dr. Shailja Mane, National Service Scheme.
7. National Service Scheme in India: A Case study of Karnataka, M.B. Dishad, Trust Publications, 2001.
8. Shastri, R.R. (1966), Social Work tradition in India, Welfare Research Organization, Varanasi.
9. Singh Surendra and Srivastava S. P. (ed 2005), Social Work Education in India, Challenge and oportunities, New Royal Book Publications, Lucknow.
10. Siddiqui, H.Y. 2015, Social Work and Human Relations,Rawat Publications, Jaipur.