---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht445"
course_title: "piping-and-pipeline-design-for-process-industries"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT445: Piping and Pipeline Design for Process Industries

## Course Objectives

- Explain the materials, dimensions, codes and standards used in piping.
- Identify the components of a piping system and select the suitable fittings/valves/pumps for a given application.
- Calculate the frictional head losses in pipelines.
- Explain the criteria and components used in piping design for process industries and describe the methods for flow measurement and protection of pipelines.
- Develop and interpret Piping & Instrumentation Diagram for process industries.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Classification, codes and materials for pipes (7 Hrs.)

- Classification of pipes and tubes, Schedule numbers, Common piping abbreviations, Major organizations for standards, IS and BS codes for pipes used in process industries, Piping materials and selection. Pipeline insulation, pipes for newtonian flow.

### Module - 2: Piping components (9 Hrs.)

- **Pipe connection and fittings:** Type of Fittings - elbows, weld tee, stub in, couplings, reducers, weld cap, screwed and socket welded fittings, Pipe nipples, flanged fittings and use of fittings, Flange Types, Gaskets, bolts and nuts.
- **Valves:** Types of valves, selection criteria of valves for various systems.
- **Pumps:** Types of pumps, NPSH requirement, pump location, pump piping, pump piping support.

### Module - 3: Frictional head losses for flow of Newtonian fluids through pipes (7 Hrs.)

- Frictional head losses for flow of Newtonian fluids through pipes, effect of surface roughness, Moody Diagram, effect of sudden expansion, sudden contraction and fittings.
- Equivalent pipes; pipes in series, parallel, series-parallel.

### Module - 4: Piping design, Pipeline protection and flow measurement (7 Hrs.)

- **Piping design:** Basic principles of piping design, Working pressure, Pipe Joints and supports, pipe installations, overhead installations.
- **Process steam piping:** Steam traps: their characteristics, selection and application, selection and determination of steam – pipe size.
- **Components of pipelines:** Pipeline protection, Instrumentation, pigging (Definition and Purpose): Pipeline coating, Cathodic protection, Internal corrosion, Flow meters, Sensors.

### Module - 5: Piping and Instrumentation Diagram (P&ID) (5 Hrs.)

- Piping and Instrumentation Diagram (P&ID): Basic Control loops, Purpose of P&ID in process industries, P&ID Symbols, Line Numbering, Valve Numbering, Equipment Identification, Abbreviations.

## References

- Bhasin, S.D. _Project Engineering of Process Plants_, Chemical Engineering Education Development Centre, IIT Madras, 1979
- Davidson, P.J & West, T. F. _Services for the Chemical Industry_, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1968.
- Henry Liu, _Pipeline Engineering_, Lewis Publishers.
- F.C. Vibrandt and C.E. Dryden, _Chemical Engineering Plant Design_, McGraw Hill, Fifth Edition.
- Frank M. White, _Fluid Mechanics_, McGraw Hill.
- Jack Broughton; _Process utility systems_; Institution of Chem. Engineers, U.K.
- M.S. Peters and Timmerhaus, _Plant design and Economics for Chemical Engineers_, Mc Graw Hill 3rd Edition.
- Roger Hunt and Ed Bausbacher, _Process Plant layout and Piping Design_ PTR Prentice‐Hall Inc.
- Cremer, H.W & Watkins, S.B , _Chemical Engineering Practice_, Vol.10, Butterworths, London, 1960
