---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht433"
course_title: "process-modelling-and-simulation"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT433: Process Modelling and Simulation

## Course Objectives

- Identify the concept of modelling and simulation of chemical engineering systems
- Describe the important physical phenomena and develop model equations for the given system.
- Demonstrate the model developing ability for various reactors and separation systems.
- Demonstrate the model developing ability for distributed systems.
- Develop the skill to simulate chemical engineering systems and processes.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Definitions and basic concepts (7 Hrs.)

- Definition of Modeling, Simulation, Classification of modeling and simulation, Types of modelling equations-Basic concepts, Basic modeling principles, Importance of modeling and simulation, Advantages and limitations of modeling and simulation, Review of simulation software.

### Module - 2: Fundamental laws of chemical engineering

- Energy equations, continuity equation, equation of motion, transport equations, equations of state, Equilibrium states and chemical kinetics.

### Module - 3: Mathematical models for lumped systems

- Mathematical models- Continuous flow tanks, Mixing vessel without reaction, Isothermal reactor with irreversible and reversible reaction. Non-isothermal steam jacketed reactor, Dynamics of solid particle falling in liquid, Boiling-open and enclosed vessel, Batch distillation, Ideal binary distillation column.

### Module - 4: Mathematical models for Distributed systems

- Mathematical models- Jacketed tubular reactor, Counter current liquid-liquid double-pipe heat exchanger.

### Module - 5: Simulation of dynamic systems

- Continuous flow tank, Isothermal CSTR in series, Non-isothermal CSTR, Binary distillation column.

## References

- Franks R.G.E., _Mathematical Modeling in Chemical Engineering_, John Wiley
- Luyben W.L., _Process Modeling, Simulation and Control for Chemical Engineers_, McGraw Hill International Edition
- Amiya K.Jana, _Computer Process Modelling and Computer Simulation_, Prentice Hall of India.
- Biquette W.B., _Process Dynamics - Modeling Analysis and Simulation_, Prentice Hall of India
- John Ingham et.al., _Chemical Engineering Dynamics - Modeling with PC Simulation_, VCH Publishers
