---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht463"
course_title: "introduction-to-data-analysis"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT463: Introduction to Data Analysis

## Course Objectives

- Develop and interpret the graphical representation of data.
- Analyse the data using descriptive statistics.
- Distinguish the properties and applications of important statistical distributions.
- Analyse the data using inferential statistics.
- Develop and interpret the linear regression analysis.
- Compare different experimental design strategies.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Graphical representation of data (7 Hrs.)

- **Graphical representation:** Bar Charts, Histograms, dot plot, Pie Charts, Scatter Plots, Line Charts, Bubble Plots, box and whisker plots, Interval plots, stem and leaf plots.
- **Descriptive statistics:** Mean, Standard Error, Median, Mode, Standard Deviation, Sample Variance, Kurtosis, Skewness, Confidence Level, Quartile, Percentile
- Development and interpretation of the above terms in any of the softwares (say, MS Excel, Matlab, R etc.)

### Module - 2: Probability and statistical distributions (7 Hrs.)

- **Probability and statistical distributions:** Probability, Properties and applications of important statistical distributions such as normal, log-normal and t-distributions, Chi-Square and F distributions
- Development and interpretation in any of the softwares (say, MS Excel, Matlab, R etc.)

### Module - 3: Hypothesis Testing (7 Hrs.)

- **Hypothesis Testing:** Formulation of null and alternate hypotheses, errors in hypothesis Tests, power of hypothesis tests, hypothesis tests on population means and variances
- **Single factor experiments:** Introduction to Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), blocking and randomization
- Development and interpretation in any of the softwares (say, MS Excel, Matlab, R etc.)

### Module - 4: Linear Regression Analysis and Factorial Design of Experiments (7 Hrs.)

- **Linear Regression Analysis:** Matrix approach to linear regression, ANOVA in regression analysis, quantifying regression fits of experimental data.
- **Factorial Design of Experiments:** Need for planned experimentation, factorial design experiments involving two factors, effect of interactions, ANOVA in factorial design, general factorial design, partial factorial designs
- Development and interpretation in any of the softwares (say, MS Excel, Matlab, R etc.)

### Module - 5: Comparison of different experimental design strategies (7 Hrs.)

- **Comparison of different experimental design strategies:** Properties of orthogonal designs, implications of different factorial design models, importance of center runs, central composite design, Box Behnken design, rotatable of experimental designs, face-centered cuboidal designs, comparison of experimental designs
- Development and interpretation in any of the softwares (say, MS Excel, Matlab, R etc.)

## References

- Statistics for Engineers and Scientists, William Navidi, 3rd Edition, Mc Graw Hill
- Montgomery D. C., _Design and Analysis of Experiments_, 8th edition, New Delhi: Wiley-India, 2011.
- Myers R. H., Montgomery D. C. and Anderson C. M., _Response Surface Methodology_, 3rd edition, New Jersey: Wiley, 2009.
- Ogunnaike B. A., _Random Phenomena_, Florida: CRC Press, 2010.
