---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 4
course_code: "uchut346"
course_title: "economics-for-engineers"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# UCHUT346: ECONOMICS FOR ENGINEERS

## Course Objectives
- To understand the fundamentals of finance and costing for engineering operation, budgetary planning and control.
- To provide fundamental concepts of micro and macroeconomics related to the engineering industry.
- To deliver the basic concepts of Value Engineering.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1
- **Basic economic problems:** Production Possibility Curve, Utility, Law of diminishing marginal utility, Law of Demand, Law of supply, Elasticity, measurement of elasticity and its applications, Equilibrium, Changes in demand and supply and its effects.
- **Production function:** Law of variable proportion, Economies of Scale, Internal and External Economies, Cobb-Douglas Production Function.

### Module 2
- **Cost concepts:** Social cost, private cost, Explicit and implicit cost, Sunk cost, Opportunity cost, short run cost curves.
- **Revenue concepts:** Firms and their objectives, Types of firms, Markets, Perfect Competition, Monopoly, Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly (features and equilibrium of a firm).

### Module 3
- **Monetary System:** Money-Functions, Central Banking, Inflation, Causes and Effects, Measures to Control Inflation, Monetary and Fiscal policies, Deflation.
- **Taxation:** Direct and Indirect taxes (merits and demerits), GST.
- **National income:** Concepts, Circular Flow, Methods of Estimation and Difficulties.
- **Stock Market:** Functions, Problems faced by the Indian stock market, Demat Account and Trading Account, Stock market Indicators- SENSEX and NIFTY.

### Module 4
- **Value Analysis and Value Engineering:** Cost Value, Exchange Value, Use Value, Esteem Value, Aims, Advantages and Application areas of Value Engineering, Value Engineering Procedure.
- **Cost-Benefit Analysis:** Break-even Analysis, Capital Budgeting, Process planning.

---

## References
- Geetika, Piyali Ghosh and Chodhury, *Managerial Economics*, Tata McGraw Hill, 2015.
- H. G. Thuesen, W. J. Fabrycky, *Engineering Economy*, PHI, 1966.
- R. Paneerselvam, *Engineering Economics*, PHI, 2012.
- Leland Blank P.E, Anthony Tarquin P. Ε., *Engineering Economy*, Mc Graw Hill, 7th Edition.
- Khan M. Y., *Indian Financial System*, Tata McGraw Hill, 2011.
- Donald G. Newman, Jerome P. Lavelle, *Engineering Economics and analysis*, Engg. Press, Texas, 2002.
- Chan S. Park, *Contemporary Engineering Economics*, Prentice Hall of India Ltd, 2001.
