---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 1
course_code: "magap01c02"
course_title: "human-rights"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP01C02: Human Rights
## Course Objectives
1. To introduce students to the historical and philosophical foundations of human rights.
2. To analyze the role of national and international institutions in the promotion and protection of human rights.
3. To examine the role of state actions and social movements in influencing human rights practices.
4. To critically assess the human rights provisions in the Indian Constitution and evaluate the effectiveness of existing protection mechanisms.

## Course Outcomes
1. Explain the origin, development, and significance of the concept of human rights.
2. Evaluate the effectiveness of state and international mechanisms in safeguarding human rights.
3. Analyze the impact of state policies and civil society movements on human rights protection.
4. Critically assess constitutional provisions and legal frameworks related to human rights in India, identifying their strengths and limitations.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 Human Rights - An Introduction
1. Meaning, Definition, Nature, Significance.
2. Evolution of Human rights.
3. Theories of Human Rights,
4. Three Generations of Human Rights and Debates on the status of the Human Rights.

### Module - 2 Human Rights - Global
1. UN and Human Rights Protection: Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), and UN Covenants on Human Rights.
2. United Nations Human Rights Council, and and UN Conventions of Human Rights: Vienna Declaration 1993.
3. Role of Non-Governmental Organisations in Protecting Human Rights, and limitations.
4. Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, and International Red Cross. 

### Module - 3 Human Rights in India
1. Constitutional Provision for Human Rights-Fundamental Fights
2. Directive Principles of State Policy
3. Protection of Human Rights Act (1993), and National Human Rights Commission & State Human Rights Commission
4. National Commission for Women, National Commission for Scheduled Tribes, National Commission for Minorities, National Commission for Scheduled Castes, and National Commission for Protection of Child Rights. 

### Module - 4 Human Rights: Social Groups & Debates
1. Human Rights of Women, LGBTQ, and Children.
2. Human Rights of Minorities, Differently and Refugees.
3. Human Rights and Media, Police, and Civil Society.
4. Capital Punishment and Mercy Killing.

## Reading List
1. Clapham, Andrew (2015). *Human Rights: A Very Short Introduction*. Oxford University Press: New Delhi.
2. Gauba, O.P (2021). An Introduction to Political Theory. (9<sup>th</sup> Edition). National Paperbacks: New Delhi.pp:372-410.
3. Byrne, Darren J O’. (2014). Human Rights: An Introduction. New Delhi: Routledge.
4. Williams, M. E. (1998). Human Rights: Opposing Viewpoints (eds). United States: Greenhaven Press.
5. Manzar, Mehtab. (2012). *Human Rights and International Politics* (Eds.). In International Politics: Concepts, Theories, and Issues. By Rumki Basu. New Delhi: Sage.pp336-351.
6. A.P. Vijapur and Kumar Suresh, Perspectives on Human Rights, Manak, New Delhi, 1999. Agarwal H.O. (1983) Implementation of Human Rights Covenants with Special Reference to India, Allahabad, Kitab Mahal.
7. Agarwal R.S. (1978) Human Rights in the Modern World, NewDelhi: Chetna Publications.
8. Ashishkumar Das (2007) Human Rights in India, New Delhi, Sarup Sons.
9. Babu Brijesh (2010) Human Rights and Social Justice, New Delhi, Global publications. 
10. Bajpai, Asha (2003): Child Rights in India: Law, Policy and Practice, New Delhi: Oxford University Press
11. Chiranjivi, Nirmal J. (2002): Human Rights in India: Historical, Social and Political Perspectives, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
12. Darren O'Byrne (2007) Human Rights: An Introduction, New Delhi, Pearson.
13. Desai A.R. (ed.) (1990) Repression and Resistance in India, Bombay, Popular Prakashan.
14. Falk, Fernandez Walter (1991) Caste and Conversion Movements in India: Religion and Human Rights, New Delhi, Indian Social Institute.
15. Forsythe David. P. (ed.) (1989) Human Rights and Development: International Views, London, Macmillan.
16. Iyer, V. R. Krishna (1990): Human Rights and Inhuman Wrongs, New Delhi: B.R. Publishing Company.
17. Iyer, V.R. Krishna (1990) Human Rights and the Law, Indore, Vedpal Law House.
18. Iyer, V.R. Krishna (1999) The Dialectics and Dynamics of Human Rights in India: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow, Calcutta, ELH.
19. Jadhav, P.B. (2010) Dalits and Human Rights: Emerging Scenario, Jaipur, Vital Publications.
20. Jayapalan N. (2000) Human Rights, New Delhi, Atlantic Publishers.
21. Kazai Farced (1987) Human Rights: Myth and Reality, New Delhi, International Publishing
22. Kerr Joanna (ed.) (1993) Ours by Right: Women’s Rights as Human Rights London: Zed Books. 
23. Khare Subhas Chandra (1977) Human Rights and UN, New Delhi: Metropoliton Books Macfarlane L.J. (1985) The Theory and Practice of Human Rights, London, Maurice Temple South. House.
24. Michel R. Anderson and Sumit Guha (2006) Changing Concepts of Rights and Justice in South Asia, New Delhi, OUP.
25. Monshipouri Mahmood, Englehart Neil, Nathan J. Andrew, Philip Kavita (eds.) (2004)
Perry Michael J. (1998) The Idea of Human Rights, New York, OUP.
26. Oliver Mendelson and Upendra Baxi, The Rights Of The Subordinate People, Oxford University Press, Delhi, 2000.
27. Rao Venketeswaran D. (2004) Child Rights: A Perspective on International and National Law, New Delhi, Manak Publication.
28. Ray, Arun (2004): National Human Rights Commission of India: Formation, Functioning And Future Prospects, New Delhi: Atlantic.
29. Remanan. R.P. (2014) Human Rights Concept and Concerns, Kottayam, Current Books
30. Sastry. T.S.N. (2005) India and Human Rights: Reflections, New Delhi, Concept Publishing Company.
31. Singh B.P (2008), Human Rights in India, Problems and Perspectives, New Delhi, Deep and Deep.
32. Singh Segal B.P. (ed.) (2008) Human Rights in India, New Delhi, Deep & Deep Publications. Sinha P.C. (2002) Encyclopaedia of Human Rights, New Delhi, Anmol Publishers. 
33. South Asia Human Rights Documentation Ce (2010) Oxford Hand Book of Human Rights and Criminal Justice in India, New York, OUP.
34. Sukumaran Nair P. (ed.) (2011) Human Rights in a Changing World, New Delhi, Kalpaz Publications.
35. Surya Yadav (2009) Human Rights in the 21<sup>st</sup> Century, New Delhi, Jnanada Prakashan.
36. Syed Mehartaj Begum (2000) Human Rights in India: Issues and Perspectives, New Delhi, APH Publishing.