---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 1
course_code: "magap01c04"
course_title: "comparative-political-analysis"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP01C04: Comparative Political Analysis

## Course Objectives
1. To introduce students to the foundational concepts and evolution of comparative politics.
2. To develop an understanding of the significance and methodologies of comparing political systems.
3. To examine and critically evaluate key political institutions and processes across selected countries.
4. To foster analytical thinking by comparing different political cultures and ideologies.

## Course Outcomes
1. Define and explain key concepts and the historical development of comparative politics.
2. Identify and apply major approaches and methods used in the comparative study of political systems.
3. Compare and critically assess constitutions, governments, electoral systems, and party structures in diverse countries.
4. Analyze the influence of political culture and ideology in shaping political behavior across different regimes.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 Comparative Politics: Approaches
1. Comparative Politics: Meaning, Definition, Evolution, and Scope.
2. Comparative Government and Comparative Politics.
3. Approaches to Comparative Politics- Institutional, Neo Institutionalism, and Dependency Theory.
4. Systems Approach – Input-Output Analysis and Structural Functional Analysis.

### Module - 2 Comparing Political Regimes
1. Comparison of Unitary Systems in Britain, France, and China.
2. Comparison of Federalism in US, Switzerland, and India.
3. Comparing Legislative-Executive Relationship- US, France, and Switzerland.
4. Comparing Legislative-Executive Relationship- Britain, India, and China.

### Module - 3 Electoral Dynamics & Party System in Comparative Perspective 
1. Electoral System: Definition, and Types of Electoral Systems.
2. Comparing Electoral Systems in USA, India, and Switzerland.
3. Typology of Party System: Classification of Maurice Duverger.
4. Comparing Party Systems in USA, UK, India, France, and China.

### Module - 4 State Forms, Regime Types, and Political Culture in Comparative Perspective
1. State and Regime Typologies: Failed State (Somalia & Yemen), and Deep State (Pakistan).
2. State and Regime Typologies: Pariah State (North Korea), and Polyarchy (USA).
3. Political Culture: Civic Culture (U K).
4. Multiculturalism (Canada & India).

## Reading List
1. Almond, Gabriel (1996): *Comparative Politics: A Theoretical Framework*, New York:
Harper Collins.
2. Almond, Gabriel and B. Powell (2004): *Comparative Politics Today*, New Delhi:
Pearson. Almond, Gabriel and Sidney Verba (2015): *The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in Five Nations*, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
3. Bates, Robert H. (2009): *The Logic of State Failure: Learning from Late-Century Africa, Dealing with Failed States*, New York: Routledge.
4. Blondel, J (ed.) (1988): *Comparative Government*: A Reader, London: Macmillan.
5. Boix, Carles, and Susan C. Stokes (eds.) (2009): *The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Politics*, New York: Oxford University Press.
6. Calvert, Peter (1983): *Politics, Power and Revolution: An Introduction to Comparative Politics*, Brighton: Wheatsheaf.
7. De Tocqueville, Alexis (2015): *Democracy in America*, London: Penguin.
8. Dogan, M.and Pelassy; D. (1990): *How to Compare Nations: Strategies in Comparative Politics*, Chatham, NJ: Chatham House.
9. Durverger, M. (1951): *Political Parties, their Organisation and Acting in the Modern State*, London: Methuen.
10. Fame, A.M. (1994): “Some Methodological Problems in Comparative Politics,” *Journal of Theoretical Polities*, 613: 302-322.
11. Ghani, Ashraf, and Clare Lockhart (2008): Fixing Failed States: *A Framework for Rebuilding a Fractured World*, New York: Oxford University Press.
12. Huntington, Samuel P (1991): *The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century*, Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.
13. Johari J C (1998): Comparative Politics, Sterling Publishers, New Delhi. 
14. Kesselman, Mark (ed.) (2006): *The Politics of Globalization: A Reader*. Boston: Wadsworth. Kohli, Atul (2004): *State-Directed Development: Political Power and Industrialization in the Global Periphery*, New Delhi: Cambridge University Press.
15. Kesselman, Mark (ed.) (2010): *Readings in Comparative Politics: Political Challenges and Changing Agendas*, Boston: Wadsworth.
16. Kopstein, Jeffrey and Mark Lichbach (eds.) (2012): *Comparative Politics: Interests, Identities, and Institutions in a Changing Global Order*, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
17. Lijphart, Arend (1971): "Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method," *American Political Science Review* 65 (3): 682–693.
18. Mayer, L.C. (2003): *Redefine Comparatives Politics: Promise versus Performance*, New
Delhi: Pearson.
19. Munck, Gerardo L (2007): “The Past and Present of Comparative Politics” in Gerardo L.
Munck and Richard Snyder, *Passion, Craft, and Method in Comparative Politics*
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
20. Norris, Pippa (1999): *Critical Citizens: Global Support for Democratic Government*,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
21. Prezworski, Adam, et al. (2000): *Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and WellBeing in the World, 1950–1990*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
22. Wiley. Price, D.K. and H.J Laski (1961): “A Debate on the Parliamentary and Presidential Systems, in R C. Macridis and B.F. Brown (eds.) *Comparative Politics: Notes and Readings*, Homewood, Ill: Dorsey Press: 365-381.
23. Putnam, Robert (1993): *Making Democracy Work*, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
24. Ray, S.N (1999): *Modern Comparative Politics: Approaches, Methods and Issues*, New
York: Harcourt, Brace.
25. Sachs, Jeffrey (1994): *Poland’s Jump to the Market Economy*, Cambridge MA: MIT
University Press.
26. Sartori; Giovanni (1970): Concept Misinformation in Comparative Politics, *American
Political Science Review*, 64; 1033-1053.
27. Scott, James C (1985): *Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance*, New Haven: Yale University Press. 