---
country: "india"
university: "mahatma-gandhi-university"
branch: "computer-applications"
version: "2017"
semester: "6"
course_code: "ca6pet01"
course_title: "data-mining"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Amendamaria"
---
# CA6PET01 - Data Mining (Elective)

---
## Course Objectives

* Understand the fundamental concepts of Data Mining, Data Warehousing, and their functionalities.
* Learn about the architecture and implementation of Data Warehouses and OLAP technology.
* Apply algorithms for mining frequent itemsets and association rules.
* Understand various techniques for data classification and prediction, such as decision trees and Bayesian classification.
* Learn different methods for cluster analysis, including partitioning and hierarchical methods.

---
## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Introduction
* *Core Concepts:* Data Mining, Data Ware House, Transactional Databases, and Data Mining Functionalities.
* *Processes:* Mining frequent patterns, Association, Classification, Prediction, and Cluster Analysis.
* *Data Preprocessing:* Data integration, transformation, reduction, and discretization.

### Module 2: Data Warehouse and OLAP Technology
* *Data Warehouse:* Multidimensional data model, data warehouse architecture, and implementation.
* *OLAP:* Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) and its relation to data mining.

### Module 3: Association Rules and Classification
* *Association Rules:* Efficient and scalable frequent itemset mining methods and mining various kinds of association rules.
* *Classification & Prediction:* Issues, Classification by Decision Tree Induction, Bayesian Classification, Rule-based classification, and Support Vector Machines.

### Module 4: Cluster Analysis
* *Fundamentals:* Definition and types of data in cluster analysis.
* *Clustering Methods:* Categorization of major clustering methods, including Partitioning methods (K-means, k-medoids), Hierarchical methods, and Density-based methods.

### Module 5: Mining Complex Data
* *Advanced Topics:* Spatial Data Mining, Multimedia Data Mining, Text Mining, and Mining the World Wide Web.

---
## References
* **Book of study:**
    * Jiawei Han and Micheline Kamber - Data Mining Concepts and Techniques, Second Edition, Elsevier, 2006
* **Reference:**
    * Witten and Frank - Data Mining Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Second Edition, Elsevier, 2005
    * Soman, Divakar and Ajay, Data Mining Theory and Practice, PHI, 2006
    * Margaret H Dunham- Data Mining-Introductory and Advanced Topics, Fourth Edition, Person 2006