---

country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "aeronautical-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 7
course_code: "oeaot721"
course_title: "rocket-propulsion"
language: "english"
contributor: "@Sharx05"

---

# OEAOT721 - Rocket Propulsion

## Course Objectives

1.  To understand the **principles and components** of rocket propulsion systems.

---

## Syllabus Modules

### Module 1: Fundamentals of Rocket Engines

-   **Principles of rocket operation**, the **thrust equation**, **specific impulse**, and other performance parameters.
-   **Design parameters** for rocket engines, energy flow, and efficiencies.

### Module 2: Solid Propellant Rocket Motors

-   General features and chemical compositions of **solid propellants** (double base, composite).
-   **Combustion of solid propellants**, burning rate, erosive burning, and combustion instability.
-   **Propellant grain configuration** and ignition systems.

### Module 3: Liquid Propellant Rocket Engines

-   Comparison of liquid engines with other systems.
-   **Liquid propellants** (monopropellant, bipropellant) and feed systems (**pressure and turbo pump**).
-   **Thrust control**, cooling systems, and combustion instability in liquid rockets.

### Module 4: Advanced Rocket Engines

-   **Hybrid rocket engines** and their characteristics.
-   Analysis of **nozzle performance** at different altitudes (over/under expanded).
-   Introduction to advanced concepts like **nuclear rockets, electric propulsion**, and **solar sails**.

---

## Reference Books

-   *Rocket Propulsion and Spaceflight Dynamics* – J. W. Cornelisse, et al., Cambridge University Press, 2016
-   *Rocket and Spacecraft Propulsion* – Martin Truner, Springer, 3rd edition, 2009
-   *Elements of rocket propulsion* – G.P. Sutton & O. Biblarz, John Wiley & Sons, 7th edition, 2010
-   *Mechanics and Thermodynamics of Propulsion* – Philip Hill and Carl Peterson, Pearson, 2009

---
