---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 6
course_code: "sw1661.a"
course_title: "social-work-practice-in-correctional-setting"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1661.A: Social Work Practice in Correctional Setting

## Course Objectives
* To give the student a conceptual framework of crime, criminology and punishment.
* To provide a broad understanding of correctional administration.
* To present an image of the Social Work perspectives in correctional settings.

## Course Content
### Module I - Crime & Criminology
* Crime: Meaning, definition and Crime patterns - Habitual, Professional, Organized, White collar, Public order crimes, Cyber crimes
* Classification of offenders under Indian Penal Code: Types
* Criminology: Meaning, Definition, Nature and Scope 

### Module II - Punishment
* Penology: Meaning and definition
* Theories of Punishment: Deterrent theory, retributive theory, preventive theory and reformative theory
* Forms of Punishment: Corporal and capital punishment

### Module III - Victims & Criminal Justice System
* Victimology: Meaning, definition
* Problems of offenders - physical, psychological, economical, socio-cultural- stigma, dependant and family
* Components of criminal justice system: Police, Courts and Correctional Homes  

### Module IV - Types of Correctional Institutions & Treatment
* Institutional treatment: Prisons, Observation homes, Special Homes, Children Homes, After care organizations, Protective Homes for Women, Short Stay Homes, Beggar Homes
* Non-Institutional treatment: Probation, Parole, After-care
* Hybrid treatment: Community Service, Work Release 

### Module V - Social Work Practice in Correctional Setting
* Correction, Reformation, Rehabilitation, Retribution – Meaning & definition
* Social Work interventions with under-trials and prisoners
* Forensic interviewing, Forensic Social Work- meaning and definition
* Role of Correctional Administration in promoting Rehabilitation
* Work with families of prisoners / Work with victims of crime

## References
1. Sullivan, Larry E, 2009, Theories of Punishment, Sage Publications.
2. Albert R. Roberts, David W. Springe, 2007, Social Work in Juvenile and Criminal Justice Settings, Charles C Thomas Publisher.
3. Jason Matejkowski, Toni Johnson, and Margaret E. Severson, 2014 Online publication, Prison Social Work, Encyclopaedia of Social Work, National Association of Social Workers press and Oxford University Press.
4. Shekar, Sanober (1982), “Another Look at the Social Work Approach to Corrections,” “Indian Journal of Criminology”, 10, 1, January, pp.56-58.
5. Sikk, K.D. (1980), “Professional Social Work in Correctional Institutions,” Indian Journal of Criminology, 8, 1, January, pp.55-61.