---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 3
course_code: "magap03c09"
course_title: "themes-in-indian-political-thought"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP03C09: Themes in Indian Political Thought

## Course Objectives
1. To introduce students to the historical background and key debates in modern Indian political thought.
2. To explore major political thinkers and ideologues in India and their perspectives on core political themes.
3. To analyse how themes like nationalism, secularism, caste, and development have been interpreted and contested in Indian political discourse.
4. To develop students’ ability to critically compare and evaluate different ideological approaches within their historical and socio-political contexts.

## Course Outcomes
1. Explain the historical and theoretical foundations of modern Indian political thought.
2. Identify and discuss the contributions of key Indian political thinkers to major political themes.
3. Analyse differing ideological perspectives on nationalism, secularism, caste, and development in India.
4. Critically compare and assess political ideas in relation to their historical context and socio-economic conditions.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 Modern Political Thought in India: An Introduction
1. The Historical Background: Colonialism, Renaissance and the National Movement
2. Approaches to the study of Indian political thought: Key Debates
    - Inclusiveness 
    - Authenticity 
    - Intellectual history tradition vs. social history tradition 
    - Capacity for theory building and explanation 
    - The role of political thoughts in protests, power struggles, and social transformation

### Module - 2 Nation and Nationalism in Modern Political Thought: A Critique 
1. Liberal, secular, cosmopolitan, and inclusive nationalism (MK Gandhi, Rabindranath Tagore, Jawaharlal Nehru, BR Ambedkar).
2. Hindutva” and “Hindu Rashtra” (VD Savarkar and MS Golwalkar), Muslims and nationalism: Two Opposite Visions (Maulana Azad and Muhammad Ali Jinnah), Dravidian nationalism (Periyar), and Socialist perspectives on nationalism (Rammanohar Lohia and EMS Namboodiripad).

### Module - 3 Secularism, Communalism, and Critical Perspectives on Caste Question
1. Gandhian secularism& Nehruvian secularism.
2. Critical Perspectives on Caste Question: Against untouchability: MK Gandhi, Annihilation of caste: BR Ambedkar, Confronting caste problematique: Sree Narayana Guru, and Caste and class: Rammanohar Lohia and BT Ranadive.

### Module - 4 State and Development
1. MK Gandhi: “Grama Swaraj”
2. Jawaharlal Nehru: Centralised state, mixed economy and planning, & MN Roy: The “People’s Plan” 

## Reading List
1. Bipan Chandra (1994): *Ideology and Politics in Modern India*, New Delhi: Har-Anand Publications.
2. KN Panikkar (1995): Culture, Ideology, Hegemony: Intellectuals and Social Consciousness in Colonial India, London: Anthem Press.
3. Pradip Kumar Datta and Sanjay Palshikar (2013): “Introduction – Reframing Indian Political Thought” in Pradip Kumar Datta and Sanjay Palshikar eds. *ICSSR Research Surveys and Explorations Political Science Volume 3: Indian Political Thought*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
4. Thomas Pantham (1986): “Introduction” in Kenneth Deutsch and Thomas Pantham eds. *Political Thought in Modern India*, London: Sage.
5. Mahendra Prasad Singh (2011): “Introduction” in Mahendra Prasad Singh and R. Roy eds. *Indian Political Thought: Themes and Thinkers*, New Delhi: Pearson.
6. Aakash Singh and Silika Mohapatra (2010): “Introduction – What is Indian Political Thought” in Aakash Singh and Silika Mohapatra eds. *Indian Political Thought: A Reader*, New Delhi: Routledge.
7. Bhikhu Parekh (2010): “The Poverty of Indian Political Theory” in Aakash Singh and Silika Mohapatra eds. *Indian Political Thought: A Reader*, New Delhi: Routledge.
8. S. P. Aiyer (1972): “Some Aspects of the Study of Modern Indian Political Thought,” *The Indian Journal of Political Science*, Vol. 33, No. 4.
9. Sanjukta Banerji Bhattacharya (2021): “Introduction” in Suratha Kumar Malik and Ankit Tomar eds. *Revisiting Modern Indian Thought: Themes and Perspectives*, New Delhi: Routledge.
10. B. Surendra Rao (2001): “The 'Modern' in Modern Indian History,” *Social Scientist*, Vol.
29, No. 5-6.
11. Javeed Alam (1999): “Chapter 7 - Tradition under Stress” in *India Living with Modernity*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
12. Partha Chatterjee (1993): *Nation and its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories*, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
13. Irfan Habib (2017): “Introduction” in *Indian Nationalism: The Essential Writings*, New Delhi: Aleph.
14. Rabindranath Tagore (2015): *Nationalism*, New Delhi: Fingerprint Publishing.
15. K. L. Tuteja and Kaustav Chakraborty (2017): “Introduction” in K. L. and Tuteja Kaustav Chakraborty eds. *Tagore and Nationalism*, New Delhi: Springer India Pvt. Ltd.
16. M K Gandhi: *Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule* in Anthony J. Parel ed. (2009): *MK Gandhi Hind Swaraj and Other Writings*, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
17. Bhikhu Parekh (1997): *Gandhi: A Very Short Introduction*, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
18. Jawaharlal Nehru (2008): “Chapter 3: The Quest” in *The Discovery of India*, New Delhi: Penguin.
19. Bhikhu Parekh (1991): “Nehru and the National Philosophy of India,” *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 26, No. 1.
20. Thomas Pantham (1995): “Gandhi, Nehru and Modernity” in Upendra Baxi and Bhikhu Parekh eds., *Crisis and Change in Contemporary India*, New Delhi: Sage.
21. S. M. Gaikwad (1998): “Ambedkar and Indian Nationalism,” *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 33, No. 10.
22. Akeel Bilgrmi (1985): “Jinnah,” *Grand Street*, Vol. 4, No. 3.
23. Ian Henderson Douglas, Minault and Christian W. Troll (1988): *Abul Kalam Azad: An Intellectual Biography*, New Delhi: OUP
24. Abul Kalam Azad (2007): *India Wins Freedom*, New Delhi: Orient Longman.
25. Christophe Jeffrelot (2007): “Vinayak Damodar Savarkar– Extracts from ‘Hindutva: Who is a Hindu,’” in *Hindu Nationalism: A Reader*, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
26. Jyotirmaya Sharma (2015): “Vinayak Damodar Savarkar” in *Hindutva: Exploring the Idea of Hindu Nationalism*, Noida: Harper Collins Publishers.
27. Christophe Jeffrelot (2007): “MS Golwalkar – ‘Extracts from we or our nationhood defined’ and ‘Bunch of Thoughts’” in *Hindu Nationalism: A Reader*, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
28. Jyotirmaya Sharma (2007): *Terrifying Vision: MS Golwalkar, the RSS and India*, New Delhi: Penguin Viking.
29. K. N. Panikar (1993): “Culture and Communalism.” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 21, No. 3-4.
30. M. S. S. Pandian (1993): “Denationalizing the Past: “Nation” in EV Ramaswamy’s Political Discourse,” *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 28, No. 42.
31. Yogendra Yadav (2010): “What Is Living and What Is Dead in Rammanohar Lohia?” *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 45, No. 40. 
32. E. M. S. Namboodiripad (1975): “Class Character of the Nationalist Movement,” Social Scientist, Vol. 4, No. 1.
33. Bipan Chandra (2004): “Gandhiji, Secularism and Communalism,” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 32, No. 1-2.
34. Jawaharlal Nehru (2008): “Chapter 3: The Quest” in *The Discovery of India*, New Delhi: Penguin.
35. Neera Chandhoke (2009): “Why is Secularism important for India?” in Neera Chandhoke and Praveen Priyadarshi eds., *Contemporary India: Economy, Society, Politics*, New Delhi: Pearson.
36. Rajeev Bhargava (2017): “Nehru against Nehruvians: On Religion and Secularism,” *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 52, No. 8.
37. Thomas Pantham (2006): “Religious Diversity and National Unity: The Gandhian and Hindutva Visions” in V. R. Mehta and Thomas Pantham eds., *Political Ideas in Modern India: Thematic Explorations*, New Delhi: Sage.
38. Bipan Chandra (2008): *Communalism in Modern India*, New Delhi: Har-Anand Publications.
39. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar: “Castes in India: Their Mechanism, Genesis and Development” and “Annihilation of Caste with a Reply to Mahatma Gandhi” in *Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar: Writings and Speeches*, Vol. 1, Bombay: Government of Maharashtra. 1979.
40. “The Ambedkar-Gandhi Debate” in *Annihilation of Caste: The Annotated Critical Edition BR Ambedkar*, New Delhi: Navayana Publishing (2014).
41. B. T. Ranadive (1979): “Caste, Class and Property Relations,” *Economic and Political Weekly*, Vol. 14, No. 7-8. 
42. E.M.S. Namboodiripad (1981): “Once Again on Castes and Classes,” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 9, No. 12.
43. P. Chandramohan (2016): *Developmental Modernity in Kerala: Narayana Guru, S.N.D.P Yogam and Social Reform*, New Delhi: Tulika Books.
44. K. P. Appan (2005): *Charithraththe Agadhamaakiya Guru* (Malayalam), Kottayam: DC Books.
45. C.V. Kunjuraman (2002): “Oru Samvadam” in KN Shaji ed. *Narayana Guru: Jeevitham, Krithikal*, Darshanam, Thrissur: Current Books (Malayalam).
46. Rammanohar Lohia (1979): *The Caste System*, Rammanohar Lohia Samta Vidyalaya Nyas, Hyderabad.
47. Sujay Biswas (2018): “Gandhi’s Approach to Caste and Untouchability: A Reappraisal,” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 46, No. 9-10.
48. Bhikhu Parekh (1999): “Chapter 7 - Discourse on untouchability” in *Colonialism, Tradition and Reform: An Analysis of Gandhi’s Political Discourse*, New Delhi: Sage.
49. J. P. Naik (1983): “Development and Gandhian Tradition in India,” *The Review of Politics*, Vol. 45, No. 3.
50. Bidyut Chakrabarty (1992): “Jawaharlal Nehru and Planning, 1938-41: India at the Crossroads,” *Modern Asian Studies*, Vol. 26, No. 2. 
51. Prabhat Patnaik (2015): “The Nehru–Mahalanobis Strategy,” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 43, No. 3-4.
52. S. Naqvi (1973): “Class Character of State Power in India,” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 2, No. 1.
53. M.N. Roy (2004): “A New Approach to Political and Economic Problems” in *MN Roy Selected Writings*, New York: Prometheus Books.
54. P.K. Michael Tharakan (2012): “Gandhian and Marxist Approaches to Decentralised Governance in India: Points of Similarity,” *Social Scientist*, Vol. 40, No. 9-10.