---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "civil-engineering"
version: "2024"
semester: 3
course_code: "gnest305"
course_title: "introduction-to-artificial-intelligence-and-data-science"
language: "english"
contributor: "@batman457"
---

# GNEST305: Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Data Science

## Course Objectives
1. Demonstrate a solid understanding of advanced linear algebra concepts, machine learning algorithms and statistical analysis techniques relevant to engineering applications, principles and algorithms.
2. Apply theoretical concepts to solve practical engineering problems, analyze data to extract meaningful insights, and implement appropriate mathematical and computational techniques for AI and data science applications.

---

## Course Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to AI and Machine Learning
- **Basics of Machine Learning:** Types of Machine Learning systems, challenges in ML.
- **Supervised Learning:** Regression models, Classification model example (Logistic regression).
- **Unsupervised Learning:** K-means clustering.
- **Artificial Neural Network:** Perceptron, Universal Approximation Theorem (statement only), Multi-Layer Perceptron, Deep Neural Network.
- Demonstration of regression and classification problems using MLP.

### Module 2: Mathematical Foundations of AI and Data Science
- **Role of linear algebra:** In Data representation and analysis.
- **Matrix decomposition:** Singular Value Decomposition (SVD), Spectral decomposition.
- **Dimensionality reduction technique:** Principal Component Analysis (PCA).

### Module 3: Applied Probability and Statistics
- **Basics of probability:** Random variables and statistical measures, rules in probability, Bayes theorem and its applications.
- **Statistical estimation:** Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE), statistical summaries.
- **Correlation analysis:** Linear correlation (direct problems only).
- **Regression analysis:** Linear regression (using least square method).

### Module 4: Basics of Data Science
- **Benefits of data science:** Use of statistics and Machine Learning in Data Science.
- **Data science process:** Applications of Machine Learning in Data Science, modelling process.
- Demonstration of ML applications in data science.
- **Big Data and Data Science:** Visualization with tools like Tableau, PowerBI, R or Python. Implementation with Python, MATLAB or R.

---

## References

- Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie and Robert Tibshirani, *An Introduction to Statistical Learning: with Applications in R*, Springer, 2nd Edition, 2021.
- Ethem Alpaydin, *Introduction to Machine Learning*, MIT Press, 4th Edition, 2020.
- Peter Bruce, Andrew Bruce, Peter Gedeck, *Practical Statistics for Data Scientists*, O’Reilly Media, 2nd Edition, 2020.
- James D. Miller, *Statistics For Data Science*, Packt Publishing, 1st Edition, 2019.
- David S. Touretzky, *Foundations of Data Science*, Carnegie Mellon University, 2018.
- Sinan Ozdemir, *Principles of Data Science*, Packt Publishing, 2016.
- Cielen, Davy, and Arno Meysman, *Introducing Data Science*, Simon and Schuster, 1st Edition, 2016.
- Kotu, Vijay, and Bala Deshpande, *Data science: concepts and practice*, Morgan Kaufmann, 2nd edition, 2018.
- Carlos Fernandez-Granda, *Probability and Statistics for Data Science*, Center for Data Science in NYU, 1st edition, 2017.
- Avrim Blum, John Hopcroft, and Ravi Kannan, *Foundations of Data Science*, Cambridge University Press, 1st edition, 2020.
- Michael J. Evans and Jeffrey S. Rosenthal, *Probability and Statistics - The Science of Uncertainty*, University of Toronto, 1st edition, 2009.
- Joseph C. Watkins, *An Introduction to the Science of Statistics: From Theory to Implementation*, Preliminary Edition.
