---
country: "india"
university: "kannur-university"
branch: "ma-governance-and-politics"
version: "2025"
semester: 2
course_code: "magap02c06"
course_title: "public-administration:-theories-and-concepts"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# MAGAP02C06: Public Administration: Theories and Concepts

## Course Objectives
1. To develop a comprehensive understanding of the structure and functioning of public institutions.
2. To introduce students to key theories, concepts, and approaches in public administration.
3. To equip students with the ability to analyze and manage administrative systems effectively.
4. To highlight the importance of public financial management and its role in governance.

## Course Outcomes
1. Critically evaluate the organization and operations of public institutions at various levels of government.
2. Apply theoretical frameworks to understand and address administrative issues in realworld contexts.
3. Demonstrate practical skills in managing public administration processes, including policy implementation and service delivery.
4. Analyze financial reports, budgets, and resource allocation strategies within public sector institutions.

## Course Content

### Module - 1 Understanding Public Administration
1. Meaning Definition, and Evolution of Public Administration.
2. New Trends: New Public Administration.
3. Development Administration.
4. New Public Management, and New Public Service.

### Module - 2 Theories of Administration
1. Classical Theory: Gullick, and Urwick.
2. Scientific Management: Taylor and Fayol.
3. Bureaucratic Theory: Max Weber and Karl Marx.
4. Human Relation Theory: Elton Mayo.

### Module - 3 Managing Organizations
1. Leadership: Likert, and Peter Druker.
2. Motivation: Maslow.
3. Conflict-Resolution: M P Follett.
4. D. Theory X and Theory Y – McGregor. 

### Module - 4 Personnel & Financial Administration
1. Bureaucracy: Role, Types, and Neutrality.
2. Generalist vs. Specialist debate.
3. Recruitment, Training and Promotion.
4. Financial Administration: Budgetary- Types and Process.

## Reading List
1. Basu, Rumki.,(1990). Public Administration: Concepts and Theories, New Delhi: Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd.
2. Bhattacharya, Mohit (RPA), (1997) Restructuring Public Administration, New Delhi: Jawahar Publishers
3. Bhattacharya, Mohit, (2009). New Horizons of Public Administration, New Delhi: Jawahar Book Centre.
4. Bourgon, Jocelyne. A New Synthesis of Public Administration: Serving in the 21st Century. McGill-Queen's University Press, 2011.
5. Chakrabarty, Bidyut and Mohit Bhattacharya (eds.), (2003). Public Administration: A Reader, New Delhi:Oxford University Press.
6. Chakrabarty, Bidyut. (2012). Public Administration in a Globalizing World: Theories and Practices, New Delhi:Sage.
7. Denhardt, Robert B. & Denhardt, Janet Vinzant, “The New Public Service Revisited” Public Administration Review, Vol. 75, No. 5 , 2015, pp. 664–672.
8. Denhardt, Robert B. & Denhardt, Janet Vinzant. “The New Public Service: Serving rather than Steering.” Public Administration Review, Vol. 60, No. 6 , 2000, pp. 549-559.
9. Flynn, Norman. “Explaining the New Public Management - The importance of context.” McLaughlin et al. (edited) New Public Management, current trends and future prospects, Routledge, 2001, pp. 57-76.
10. Frederickson, H. George et al. “Theories of Public Management”. The Public Administration Theory Primer, Boulder, CO : Westview Press, 2015, pp. 97-130.
11. Henry, Nicholas. (2004). Public Administration and Public Affairs, New Delhi; Prentice-Hall of India
12. Laxmikant, M. (2011). Public Administration, New Delhi: Tata McGraw Hill.
13. Maheshwari S.R., (1998). Administrative Theory: An Introduction, New Delhi: Macmillan
14. Shafritz Jay M. and Hyde, Albert C. (ed.), (1987). Classics of Public Administration, Chicago, Illinois: The Dorsey Press.
15. Svara, James H. “The Myth of the Dichotomy: Complementarity of Politics and Administration in the Past and Future of Public Administration.” Public Administration Review, vol. 61, no. 2, 2001, pp. 176–183. 