---
country: "india"
university: "kerala-university"
branch: "bachelor-of-social-work"
version: "2019"
semester: 4
course_code: "sw1442"
course_title: "urban-planning-and-development"
language: "english"
contributor: "@MaryamMohamedYahya"
---

# SW1442: Urban Planning and Development 

## Course Objectives
* To provide an understanding about urban problems and administration.
* To give an insight into urban planning and development.
* To create an awareness about the major programmes of urban community development.

## Course Content
### Module 1 - Basic Concepts of Urban Planning and Development
* Meaning and Definition: Urban, Urban Planning, Urban Community Development, Rural-urban continuum, urbanism, urbanization
* Characteristics of urban community
* Theories of urbanization: Zone theory, migration theory-push and pull theory

### Module 2 - Urban Problems
* Problems in Urban areas: Poverty, Unemployment, Substance abuse, housing problems, pollution, commercial sex work, migration and related problems; crimes and deviances – trafficking, gang violence
* Slums, meaning definition and characteristics, slum development
* Role of NGOs in addressing urban problems  

### Module 3 - Urban Administration
* Types of urban areas
* Salient Features of 74th amendment of the Constitution (Nagarapalika Act)
* Urban Local self governments: Administrative system, roles and function – Municipal Corporation, Municipal Towns, Town Panchayaths
* Urban Development Authorities – GCDA, TRIDA

### Module 4 - Urban Community Planning and Development
* Urban Development Planning
* Legislations: urban land ceiling act, Town and Country planning Act
* Provisions in Nagarapalika Act for urban development planning
* Perspective plans and annual plans of urban local bodies (review any one local body’s perspective plan and annual plan – Municipal town or municipal corporation)
* Peoples’ participation and accountability of local bodies – Citizens Charter
* Role of social worker in urban community planning and development

### Module 5 - Programmes for Urban Community Development
* Centre and State government programmes
* Poverty alleviation and livelihood – NULM
* Health – NHM
* Housing – VAMBAY, RAY
* Employment and Skill Development – NRY, DDUGKY
* Sanitation: ‘Swachh Bharat’
* Transportation: JNNURM
* Beautification and environment protection
* Role of Social Worker in Government Projects

## References
1. Bhardwaj, R K, The Municipal administration in India: A Sociological analysis of rural & urban India.
2. Kaiser Edward J., et.al., 1995, Urban Landuse Planning 4th (ed) Urbana, University of Illinois Press.
3. Bola Ayeni, 1979, Concepts and Techniques in Urban Analysis, Croom Helm, London.
4. John Glasson – An Introduction to regional Planning 2nd Edition, Hatchinson – London (The Britt Environment Series).
5. Allen G. Noble, et.al, (eds), Regional Development and Planning for the 21st Century: New priorities New Philosophies, Aldershot, USA, 1998.
6. Asesh Kumar Maitra, ‘Urban Environment in Crisis’, New Age International (P) Limited, Publishers, New Delhi.
7. Avijit Gupta and Mukul G. Asher, ‘Environment and the Developing World’, John Wiley & Sons, New York, USA.
8. Rao P.K (2001), ‘Sustainable Development’, Blackwell Publishers, Massachusetts, USA.
9. Manual of Human Settlements Development – Ministry of urban development, Government of India.
10. Das, Kumar Amiya, Urban Planning in India, Rawat Publications, New Delhi, 2007.
11. Mohan, Sudha, Urban Development New Localism, Rawat Publications, New Delhi, 2005.
