---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "computer-science-and-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: "5"
course_code: "cst301"
course_title: "formal-languages-and-automata-theory"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---


# CST301: Formal Languages and Automata Theory

## Course Objectives
* Classify a given formal language into Regular, Context-Free, Context-Sensitive, Recursive or Recursively Enumerable. *(Cognitive knowledge level: Understand)*
* Explain a formal representation of a given regular language as a finite state automaton, regular grammar, regular expression and Myhill-Nerode relation. *(Cognitive knowledge level: Understand)*
* Design a Pushdown Automaton and a Context-Free Grammar for a given context-free language. *(Cognitive knowledge level: Apply)*
* Design Turing machines as language acceptors or transducers. *(Cognitive knowledge level: Apply)*
* Explain the notion of decidability. *(Cognitive knowledge level: Understand)*

## Course Content
### Module - 1 (Introduction to Formal Language Theory and Regular Languages)
* Introduction to formal language theory – Alphabets, Strings, Concatenation of strings, Languages.
* Regular Languages - Deterministic Finite State Automata (DFA) *(Proof of correctness of construction not required)*, Nondeterministic Finite State Automata (NFA), Equivalence of DFA and NFA, Regular Grammar (RG), Equivalence of RGs and DFA.

### Module - 2 (More on Regular Languages)
* Regular Expression (RE), Equivalence of REs and DFA, Homomorphisms, Necessary conditions for regular languages.
* Closure Properties of Regular Languages, DFA state minimization *(No proof required)*.

### Module - 3 (Myhill-Nerode Relations and Context-Free Grammars)
* Myhill-Nerode Relations (MNR) - MNR for regular languages, Myhill-Nerode Theorem (MNT) *(No proof required)*, Applications of MNT.
* Context Free Grammar (CFG) - CFG representation of Context Free Languages *(proof of correctness is required)*, derivation trees and ambiguity, Normal forms for CFGs.

### Module - 4 (More on Context-Free Languages)
* Nondeterministic Pushdown Automata (PDA), Deterministic Pushdown Automata (DPDA), Equivalence of PDAs and CFGs *(Proof not required)*.
* Pumping Lemma for Context-Free Languages *(Proof not required)*, Closure Properties of Context Free Languages.

### Module - 5 (Context Sensitive Languages, Turing Machines)
* Context Sensitive Languages - Context Sensitive Grammar (CSG), Linear Bounded Automata.
* Turing Machines - Standard Turing Machine, Robustness of Turing Machine, Universal Turing Machine, Halting Problem, Recursive and Recursively Enumerable Languages.
* Chomsky classification of formal languages.

## References
* Dexter C. Kozen, *Automata and Computability*, Springer (1999).
* John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani and Jeffrey D. Ullman, *Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation*, 3/e, Pearson Education, 2007.
* Michael Sipser, *Introduction to Theory of Computation*, Cengage Publishers, 2013.
