---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "information-technology"
version: "2019"
semester: "3"
course_code: "itt201"
course_title: "data-structures"
language: "english"
contributor: "@AVA-NTHIKA14"
---

# ITT201: Data Structures

## Course Outcomes

- Summarize different categories of data structures.
- Identify different parameters to analyze the performance of an algorithm.
- Explain the significance of dynamic memory management techniques.
- Design algorithms to perform operations with linear and nonlinear data structures.
- Illustrate various techniques for searching, sorting and hashing.
- Choose appropriate data structures to solve real world problems efficiently.

## Modules

### Module 1: Introduction to Data Structures

Data Structures – Introduction and Overview – Arrays, Algorithm/Program Development, Searching and Sorting.

### Module 2: Linked Lists

Linked lists – Singly linked list, Doubly linked list, Circular linked list – Applications of linked list – Dynamic Memory management.

### Module 3: Stacks and Queues

Stack – Applications of stacks – Queues – Types of queues.

### Module 4: Trees and Graphs

Trees – Binary Tree Traversals – Binary tree Applications – Graph – Graph Applications.

### Module 5: Hash Tables

Hash Tables, Different Hash Functions, Collision Resolution Techniques, Closed Hashing and Open Hashing (Separate Chaining).

## References

- Samanta D., *Classic Data Structures*, Prentice Hall India, 2/e, 2009.
- Ellis Horowitz, Sartaj Sahni, *Fundamentals of Data Structures*, Galgotia Booksource.
- Horwitz E., S. Sahni and S. Anderson, *Fundamentals of Data Structures in C*, University Press (India), 2008.
- Aho A. V., J. E. Hopcroft and J. D. Ullman, *Data Structures and Algorithms*, Pearson Publication, 1983.
- Tremblay J. P. and P. G. Sorenson, *Introduction to Data Structures with Applications*, Tata McGraw Hill, 1995.
- Peter Brass, *Advanced Data Structures*, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
- Lipschutz S., *Theory and Problems of Data Structures*, Schaum’s Series, 1986.
- Wirth N., *Algorithms + Data Structures = Programs*, Prentice Hall, 2004.
- Hughes J. K. and J. I. Michtom, *A Structured Approach to Programming*, PHI, 1987.
- Martin Barrett, Clifford Wagner, *Unix: Tools For Software Design*, John Wiley, 2008 reprint.
