---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "group_a"
version: "2024"
semester: 1
course_code: "gmest103 "
course_title: "engineering-graphics-and-computer-aided-drawing"
language: "english"
contributor: "@nygilJohns"
---

# GMEST103 : ENGINEERING GRAPHICS AND COMPUTER AIDED DRAWING


## Course Objectives
* To learn the principles and techniques of dimensioning and preparing engineering drawings
* To develop the ability to accurately interpret and understand engineering drawings. 
* To learn the features of CAD software 

## Course Content
### Module - 1 Introduction
* Relevance of technical drawing in engineering field. Types of lines, Dimensioning, BIS code of practice for technical drawing. (No questions for the end semester examination) 
* Projection of points in different quadrants, Projection of straight lines inclined to one plane and inclined to both planes.
* Trace of a line.
*  Inclination of lines with reference planes.
*  True length and true inclinations of line inclined to both the reference planes.  

### Module - 2 Projection of Solids
* Projection of Simple solids such as Triangular, Rectangle, Square, Pentagonal and Hexagonal Prisms, Pyramids, Cone and Cylinder only.
* Projection of solids in simple position including profile view. 
* Projection of solids with axis inclined to one of the reference planesand with axis inclined to both reference planes. 
 
  
### Module - 3 Sections of Solids and Development of Surfaces
* Sections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone and Cylinder only, with axis in vertical position and cut by different section planes.
* True shapeof the sections. (Exclude true shape given problems)
* Development of surfaces of the solids and solids cut by different section planes. (Exclude problems with through holes)

### Module - 4 Isometric Projection and Computer Aided Drawing (CAD)
* Isometric scale- Isometric View and Projections of Prisms, Pyramids, Cone, Cylinder, Sphere, Hemisphere and their combinations.  
* Introduction, Role of CAD in design and development of new products, Advantages of CAD.
* Creating twodimensional drawing with dimensions using suitable software. (CAD, only internal evaluation)



## References
* Kulkarni, D. M., Rastogi, A. P. and Sarkar,  Engineering Graphics with AutoCAD, Prentice Hall India Publishers 2020 Edition. 
* Venugopal, K. Engineering Drawing & Graphics, New Age International Publishers, 5th Edition 2011
* Parthasarathy, N. S., andMurali, V.  Engineering Drawing, Oxford University Press, 2015 Edition
