---
country: "india"
university: "ktu"
branch: "chemical-engineering"
version: "2019"
semester: 7
course_code: "cht443"
course_title: "corrosion-engineering"
language: "english"
contributor: "@UmarAlMukhtar"
---

# CHT443: Corrosion Engineering

## Course Objectives
* Summarize the principles of corrosion considering electrochemical, environmental, metallurgical and other aspects.
* Identify and explain the different types of corrosion.
* Explain various corrosion testing techniques.
* Explain various corrosion control techniques.
* Select the appropriate corrosion control technique for different engineering materials and industries.
* Identify corrosion-related problems and propose viable solutions.

## Course Content

### Module - 1: Definition and importance of corrosion (7 Hrs.)
* Definition and importance of corrosion: Principles of corrosion phenomenon: Corrosion rate expressions, Electrochemical aspects, Environmental effects, Metallurgical and other aspects.

### Module - 2: Different forms of corrosion (7 Hrs.)
* Different forms of corrosion: Galvanic or two metal corrosion, Crevice corrosion, Pitting, Intergranular corrosion, Selective leaching, Erosion corrosion, Stress corrosion, Hydrogen damage.

### Module - 3: Corrosion testing and monitoring (6 Hrs.)
* Corrosion testing and monitoring: Non-electrochemical and electrochemical methods: potentiostat, Tafel extrapolation, linear polarization, galvanostat, impedance spectroscopy, thermogravimetric technique, salt spray test, weight change measurements.

### Module - 4: Corrosion prevention
* Corrosion prevention: Design and coatings, inhibitors and surface engineering, cathodic protection and anodic protection.

### Module - 5: Corrosion and its control in different engineering materials and industries (8 Hrs.)
* **Corrosion and its control in different engineering materials:** concrete structures, duplex, super duplex stainless steels, ceramics, composites and polymers.
* **Corrosion and its control in industries:** Power, Process, Petrochemical, ship building, marine and fertilizer industries. Corrosion auditing in industries, Corrosion map of India.

## References
* Fontana M. G., *Corrosion Engineering*, Tata McGraw Hill, 3rd Edition, 2005.
* Jones D. A, *Principles and Prevention of Corrosion*, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2nd Edition, 1996.
* Scully J. C, *The Fundamentals of Corrosion*, 2nd Ed., Pergamon Press.
* Stansbury E. E. and Buchanan, R. A, *Fundamentals of Electrochemical Corrosion*, ASM International.
* Uhlig H. H. and Revie R. W, *Corrosion and Corrosion Control*, 3rd Ed., John Wiley & Sons.
